6

4.0 ORIGINS
Era, Iluvatar, the One, is the beginning and the end. He alone can
give or take life. Only he created that which is and will be. From
his thought came the Flame Imperishable, the wonderous marvel
that fuels the spirit of every being. All creatures' souls are tied to
this undying fire of life.
Era's thought gave birth to the Ainur, the highest of the Valar or
"Powers," the greatest spirits in Eä (Existence). He gathered his
offspring and instilled them with music, calling upon them to sing
together. Over countless ages they sang, until their unique and
purposeful melodies became refined and their voices melded in a
glorious harmony that was the Great Music (Ainulindalë) that gave
birth to Eä. This Song set the patterns of Creation, the Essence of
all that is.
Together, the Ainur forged the Heavens (Menel) and the Earth
(Arda); however, one of their number sought his own scheme and
disturbed their innocent unity. Hoping to achieve his own scheme,
Melkor (Q. "He Who Arises in Might") sang according to his own
desire. Melkor strove to manipulate the Flame Imperishable and
create for himself. In this horrid quest, he failed and became the
Fallen Ainu; with this awful vision, he gave birth to Evil, for
Melkor was Evil incarnate. He would, in time, become known as
Morgoth: the "Black Enemy."
Era ended the Great Music and admonished the sundered Valar.
He then forced Morgoth, the powerful, renegade Ainu, to submit.
The Black Enemy abided by his Lord's word and showed remorse
as he submitted to the will of the One, but a deep and painful hatred
rooted itself in Melkor's soul.
Era forgave his proud offspring and took the Ainur out of their
wondrous home in the Timeless Halls and led them outside the
Void to Eä, conferring upon them the mission to mold the World
according to the glory that stirred within them. Thus, the Valar set
about crafting the beautiful but unworked jewel of creation. They
sculpted Arda and arranged the Heavens. After a time, though,
Melkor rebelled again, and a struggle raged through Eä that
destroyed the placid Balance of Things.

Origins: Arda's Creatures & Morgoth's Monsters
This work, of course, deals with the Kelvar, living things that
move, the creatures. They count all living things other than the
Olvar and the Children of Iluvatar. Within this category, though,
there are creatures that must looked upon in a special light, for they
are perversions of life and fall outside Era's original scheme.
These are the creatures we call monsters.

4.1 ARDA'S CREATURES
Era's conception involves myriad tiers of creation. This is
undoubtedly the case with living things, for there is a distinct order
in place in Eä. The Valar command the highest tier, just above their
more numerous Maia servants. In turn, the Maiar oversee the
Olvar, Kelvar, and the Children of Iluvatar: the Elves, Men,
Dwarves, etc.

4.2 MORGOTH'S MONSTERS
All monsters are the offspring of Evil and are directly or
indirectly tied to the thoughts and incantations of the Black Enemy.
They are not creations of Morgoth or his servants; rather, they are
creatures who individual or racial spirits have been manipulated in
order to alter their original character. Since only Era can create or
destroy life, all spirits, even monsters, owe their origin to him.
However, unlike animals, monsters are artificial in nature. They
enjoy extended lifespans, extraordinary powers, and incredible
personae. At the same time, they cheat Fate and suffer from the
partial or utter lack of Era's favor and blessing. Their spirits burn
with a twisted fire that flickers with a character that is no longer one
with the Flame Imperishable. Their very being is a manipulation
of the Essence, and is therefore outside the Balance of Things.

Animal Glossary: Bats and Birds

7

BLACK SWANS: wmk-FW,H-6; 7ft wingspan

5.0 ANIMAL GLOSSARY
As noted above, animals are of the order Elves call "Kelvar,"
which means living things that move. They are natural creatures.
imbued with their own will and limited only by their inherent
attributes and the gift of death. Like the the Olvar and the Children
of Iluvatar, they fit within Eru's original scheme and live in accord
with the Balance of Things.

Black Swans are found from Mordor and northward into
Wilderland, as far as the southern reaches of Mirkwood. They are
also quite common in the river valleys of Nûrad and Rhovanion,
especially along the River Anduin. They are large for Swans and
have been known to mob and overturn boats, usually because the
vessels had come too close to the Swans' huge nests.

5.1 BATS AND BIRDS

C A V E R N WINGS: wmskt-UV,EL-5; 1-2 ft wingspan

Because they call the sky their domain, birds and bats are closest
to the Heavens and enjoy some favor from Manwë and Varda (the
King and Queen of the Valar). Indeed, the Great Eagles are
considered the most noble of all the Kelvar. They serve the Valar
as messengers, scouts, and warriors.
There are over 10,000 species of Endorian avians. Ranging in
size from tiny Dwarf Hummingbirds that weigh no more than a
gram to Great Eagles who are capable of carrying a large rider and
all his equipment, they fill a distinct niche in virtually every
ecosystem. Their bright colors, remarkable songs, and stunning
aerial skills generate pleasure, wonder, awe, and envy among
Eru's Children.
Warm-blooded vertebrates with extremely active metabolisms
and four limbs, birds are the only animals with feathers. Their
forward limbs are modified to form wings, enabling most birds to
fly. Their tail feathers provide added flight surfaces and are
attached to the "false tail" in their rump.
Bats are also warm-blooded avians who are capable of sustained
flight (as opposed to gliding). Unlike birds, though, they are
mammals whose wings are membranes that are supported on the
four elongated fingers of each forelimb and are attached to their
ankles and/or tail.
NOTE: As a whale, the bats and birds of Middle-earth are
larger, smarter, and more magical than more commonplace
avians.

Cavern Wings are large, intelligent Bats found predominantly in
Moria, although they have been reported in other caverns in the
Misty Mountains. They seem to have a very sophisticated "biting
order," culminating in a leader, a phenomenon not observed in any
other Bat species. This leader directs the other bats in their group
hunts, indicating which potential victims to ignore, which to
attack. The Cavern Wings' weapon is their razor sharp claws, with
which they rip their victims into bite-sized shreds. Their voices are
low-pitched for bats, allowing most of their victims to have some
warning of their approach — although this rarely helps, as the
Cavern Wings are very quick and extremely maneuverable. These
bats have dark gray to black fur, often speckled in younger Cavern
Wings. The best defense is the ability to pick out the leader, for if
that bat is slain, the rest will retreat until the flock sorts itself out
and chooses a new leader.

BARROW

CLIFF BUZZARDS: wmkt-AF,CD,LRY-4; 6ft wingspan

OWLS:

mkt-V,HP,L-6;

6

inch

wingspun

CHAMBER BIRDS: wmkt-UV,LX-7; 3 ft wingspan
White, mute, and almost blind, the odd, fungus-eating Chamber
Bird is one of the many strange inhabitants of Moria. They seek
out the fungus by their remarkable sense of smell (odd indeed for
a bird) and note enemies by their inaudibly high cries, in the
manner of bats. Their large, gaping beaks have serrated edges and
their bluish talons are both sharp and strong. Totally herbivorous
(primarily fungivorous), they rarely attack animals unless surprised or starving (some instinct for meat seems to remain from
some predacious ancestor).

The Barrow Owl is a small, rare Owl which has taken to l i v i n g
in the open barrows and abandoned gopher tunnels of Eriador
(especially in northern Cardolan). Nocturnal and exceedingly
specialized, they are virtually blind when confronted with bright
light (e.g., in day- or torchlight). This is important, for they startle
easily and swarm like Bees when confronted with a potential foe.
They carry numerous diseases, including rabies and lycanthresis,
to which they are immune. (Normally 2nd-3rd level, the latter
disease is a severe psychiatric infliction that affects victims in 110 days and leaves them with the false belief that they are wild
animals.)

The Cliff Buzzard is a large, black-feathered bird of the mountains. It builds its nest on inaccessible cliffs. Often several pairs
will nest in the same area, behavior more typical of the Corvidae
(crowlike birds) than of the Raptors (Hawks and so on). Cliff
Buzzards exhibit a great deal of intelligence (for birds) and will
cooperate in hunting. They will band together to mob some large
creature and drive it over a cliff so that they may all feast together
on the shattered body. Any wounded creature, no matter what its
size, may be subject to the unwanted attentions of the Cliff
Buzzards. They are most common on the southern slopes of the
White Mountains.

BITTERNS: mktc-M-2; 4 ft wingspan

CRAKES AND COOTS: mktc-M-2; 2ft wingspan

A wading and fishing bird found in the deltas of northwestern
Endor, the Bittern, or Northern Heron, is known for its strange
resonant, mournful cry. It is slow, cunning, deliberate hunter that
feeds on snakes, crustaceans, and fish. Bitterns migrate, spending
their winters in the wetlands along the temperate seacoasts and
their summers in the lakes and deltas of the North.

A black-and-purple ducklike species, the Crake is known as a
noisy and obnoxious waterbird. It has wide, splayed feet, allowing
it to dash across pondweed and mudflats. Crakes are also excellent
swimmers and remarkably swift flyers. They are among the most
flexible and adaptable species in all of Middle-earth, ranging as far
north as Forodwaith, Mur, and Urb. The Crake's closest relative,
the Coot, builds island nests up to three or four feet across from
reeds and weeds.

8

Animal Glossary: Locations of Bats and Birds

Animal Glossary: Bats and Birds

9
GREAT EAGLES: (hf)-AGFS,JT,EKLQ-7;5ft body;30ft wingspan

ECHO HAWKS: wmskt-UV,LRX-6; 2-3 ft wingspan
The Echo Hawk is a large subterranean bird and a menace that
few would expect to meet underground in a cave. It is a raptor that
has totally adapted to life in a lightless environment, utilizing both
infravision and echo-location for its hunting. The echo Hawk's
nostrils are unusually large, giving it, like the chamber bird
(above), a keenness of scent quite rare in a bird. Its beak and talons
are unusually large, hard, and sharp, so much so that the Echo
Hawk can pierce through most types of armor. As is usual with the
raptors, the female Hawk is larger than the male. Otherwise, the
sexes are similar, with dull white feathers, colorless skin, and
beaks and talons like translucent horn.
FLYING FOXES: mst-FMSVWZ,HP,Q-4; 6-9 inch body; 2-3 ft
wingspan
A variety of large bat, the Flying Fox makes its home amid
brambles or in the tops of dense, partially-submerged trees of the
coastal wetlands. They are most common in the marshes and
scrublands of the East, although a few smaller varieties make their
homes in Rhûn and one group lives in southern Eriador.
Unlike most bats, the Flying Fox thrives in daylight, having
good eyesight and a refined sense of smell. Using its long snout,
it hunts rodents in the scrub and bites wild berries which might
elude its more flatfaced cousins.
The Flying Fox is considered synonymous with evil magic in
many areas of eastern Middle-earth.

The Great Eagles are the most noble of all birds, having been
created by the Valar Manwë, Lord of the Air, and Yavanna, Queen
of the Earth. Appointed as overseers of all the Kelvar, they have
played many glorious roles in the history of Middle-earth. Their
exploits are legion. They have rescued numerous champions who
were in their hour of greatest need. Both the Noldo Elf Maedhros,
who was imprisoned in Thangorodrim, and Gandalf the Grey, who
was confined at Orthanc by Saruman, owe their salvation to these
graceful creatures. (Indeed, they also aided Gandalf after his
combat with the Balrog of Moria.)
Great Eagles are as intelligent as any of the Free Peoples but are
not numbered among them, presumably because they lack the
power to build things and fashion crafts. These huge birds are not
to be trifled with, though: they are fierce foes when aroused to
anger and have little patience with faint-heartedness in the face of
danger. They are stalwart foes of Evil and especially hate any other
creature of the air who has allied with the Valar's enemies.
Great Eagles confer among themselves in their own tongue,
Eryr-aryth, but they can usually also speak Sindarin and some
prevalent Mannish tongue(s) (e.g., Westron). Some particularly
scholarly Eagles have mastered dozens of languages.
Thorondor, Lord of the Eagles of Crissaegrim. Thorondor was
the chief of the Eagles of Beleriand in the First Age. He was a
staunch friend and ally of the Edain and the Noldor. Among his
noble deeds was the leading of the guard force of Eagles on
Gondolin, the city of the Noldor in that Age, the rescue of
Maedhros, the wounding of Morgoth himself, the recovery of
the body of the Noldo Fingolfin during the Battle of the Sudden
Flame (Dagor Bragollach), the rescue of Beren and Lúthien as
they fled from Angband, and the leading of the Eagle forces
during the Great Battle at the end of the First Age. Thorondur
was allowed to go West at the end of the Age. No Great Eagle
since has left such a legacy or been so powerful. His 180'
wingspan made Thorondor the largest bird ever to fly over
Endor, and his size enabled him to melee Dragons.
Gwaihir Windlord, Lord of the Eagles of the Misty Mountains.
Gwaihir became a friend of Gandalf the Istar after the latter
healed him of a poisoned wound. Gwaihir repaid his friend's
kindness many times over as the years went by, rescuing
Gandalf, Thorin Oakenshield and their companions from Wargs
and Goblins (Orcs) on their way to the Lonely Mountain. The
Windlord subsequently led his Eagles to the Battle of the Five
Annies. He also rescued Gandalf from his imprisonment atop
Isengard and later from the Peak of Zirak Zigil (Silvertine) after
his battle with the Balrog. Finally, Gwaihir saved Frodo the
Ringbearer and his companion Samwise from Orodruin (Mount
Doom) after the destruction of the One Ring. Gwaihir's Eagles
also served Gandalf and his fellow Istar Radagast as spies at
their Lord's instructions.
Landroval, Brother of Gwaihir. Nearly as mighty as his brother,
Landroval aided in the rescue of Frodo and Samwise from
Mordor in the cataclysm accompanying the destruction of the
Ruling Ring.

10

GREAT FALCONS OF ARDOR: h-AF,JP,L-7;4.5ftbody,
25ft wingspan
These fierce creatures were the preferred mounts of the Lords of
the Air of the Court of Ardor in southern Middle-earth. They were
perhaps developed from the Great Falcons of Mirkwood (see
below). This fact would have been known to Sauron, who could
have shared his knowledge with the evil Elda Court. The fiercest
of these Falcons were tied to specific of the Windlords by magical
means. Their loyalty to their masters was unswerving, and no one
else could ride them unless they could somehow overcome the will
of the Falcons by magical means.
Sûlroch, Elros, and Gilsûl, Finest Falcons of Ardor. These
mighty birds were the steeds of Sûlherok, Messenger of the
Court of Ardor, and Valkrist, the Court 's Lord of Arms (who had
the latter two at his disposal).
GREAT FALCONS OF MIRKWOOD: k-AF,CD,EL-8; 3.5 ft
body. 20ft wingspan
Rarely seen despite their huge
size. Great Falcons reside in remoter and higher reaches of the
Forest of Mirkwood. (Actually
most reside in the Emyn-nu-Fuin.
the "Mountains of Mirkwood.")
They are almost untameable, probably due to the difficulty of hooding
and confining such a huge bird, even
as an eyas (fledgling). Great Falcons are surprisingly maneuverable
for such large birds, as is necessary
for any winged beast that would live
in the dense forest. Their light build
makes them unable to carry more
than around 70 lbs, so they make
poor mounts.
GOLODOS: mktc-M-4;3.5ft wingspan
A Golodo is a bright green, moderately large, flightless bird, rather
like a large goose on stilts. Excellent swimmers, they subsist primarily on fish, crustaceans, and shellfish. Golodos gather in large flocks
during the breeding season in early
summer, traveling in small groups during the rest of the year.
Golodos will immediately flee the scent of any predator with
surprising, if ungainly speed — except during the nesting season,
when they will bravely defend their eggs. Given to snapping up
carrion, Golodos enjoy the taste of meat: however, they will eat
anything, since they are poor hunters.

Animal Glossary: Bats and Birds
sites are often littered with minor yet still significant amount
wealth. However, since Gorcrows will cooperate in protect
their nest sites, would-be plunderers are well-advised to be
cautious and to wear helmets with small eyeslits: Gorerows
notoriously fond of eyeballs!
GRASS GROUSES: wmk-F,P,L-3; 8-12 inches
A plump, gallinaceous (chickenlike) bird of the grasslands
Calenardhon (Rohan), the tasty Grass Grouse is the preferred prey
of many hunters, be they winged or two- or four-legged. Many
man, Red Fox, or Hawk will pass easier prey by for a crack at
greasy Grass Grouse. Their black-speckled brown plumage provides good camouflage in the tall grasses, so the birds prosper and
spread in spite of their inherent appeal to the palate. The male
booming mating cry is most remeniscent of a drunk blowing over the
neck of a bottle.
GREAT BATS: ktc, FUV,CD,L5 ft wingspan
Seldom-seen, the grey and purple
Great Bat is found in remoter parts
of Mirkwood. Little is known of its
habits. It eats night-flying birds
(e.g.. Owls), large spiders, and various rodents, although larger individuals have been known to fell
small bear. The Great Bat suck
blood (always a tempting notion to
those who dislike bats, even the
small insectivorous kind) from its
victims, and feeds on the softer flesh
of its prey.
GREAT GREEN PHEASANTS:
wmk-F,P,L-4; 18-24 inches (3-4 ft
with tail)
The Great Green Pheasant is a
handsome bird. Females and their
immature offspring sport lustrous
bornze-green plumage. Emerald
green feathers and long, trailing tail
plumes adorn the male. The cocks
are famous for their ferocious duels
over potential mates: they rush at
each other fiercely, broadsiding
their rivals in clouds of emerald green down, until one or the other
retreats, exhausted and bedraggled. Great Green Pheasants, like
the Grass Grouse, are considered tasty, but this larger bird must be
hung before eating, as it is tougher (in every way) than the passive
Grass Grouse.
GREEN-WINGED CROWS: wmk-FM,H,L-3: 10-12 inches

GORCROWS: ktc-FM,CDHP,LRY-4; 4ft wingspan
Smaller cousins of the evil Crebain, Gorcrows are not so much
evil as indifferent to suffering. Not nearly as bright as their larger
cousins, Gorcrows live to eat (although, if asked, they would
probably insist that they merely eat to live). They are attracted to
shiny things, and Gorcrows have picked up unbelievable numbers
of shiny trinkets and small coins. Their untidy, communal nesting

A lively, intelligent bird of the marshes and shores, the Greenwinged Crow can be tamed even as an adult. They make effective
messengers, able to find their way home from any direction within
a 75- 100 mile radius. However, like most of the Corvidae. they are
attracted and distracted by shiny objects. With their shiny black
plumage marked distinctively on the "shoulder" of the wing with
a patch of iridescent green, these crows make attractive pets.

Animal Glossary: Bats and Birds

11
KINGFISHERS: wmk-M-3; 9 inch wingspan
The smallest of Endor's fisherfowl, the Kingfisher is also
the most attractive. It has a large, silvery bill and silver, blue,
orange and white feathers. The Kingfisher's riverbank home
belies its beauty, though, for it is little more than a dirty hole
full of old fish bones and rotting mess. Besides fish, the
Kingfisher preys on insects, centipedes, and small lizards and
amphibians.
KlRINKIR: wmk-F,D,EL-9;2-3 inches
The Kirinki is a tiny scarlet bird with an extremely high
chirp that was one of the most beloved songbirds of Númenor.
After the Downfall in S.A. 3319, knowledge of these wondrous singers became confined to verse, illustrations in books,
and works of art depicting the little creatures. Some of the
F a i t h f u l who escaped from Númenor, however, brought their
pet Kirinkir with them. Whether any survived or thrived is
another matter, although there have been rumors that Radagast the Brown has a pair at his home at Rhosgobel (near the
southwestern eaves of Mirkwood).
ORAO:

H U N T I N G BATS: wm-AF,U, CD-5; 3-6ft wingspan
A large, carnivorous bat of the White Mountains, Hunting Bats
are attracted to the smell of blood. They will pounce upon a
bleeding victim, tearing flesh from bone with their small, razorsharp teeth. In addition, they are notorious carriers of disease.
Hunting Bats usually dwell near the entrance of a cave (on the
inside, of course), but they can also be found in the crevices of cliffs
and in abandoned buildings.
JATEWOONES: mktc-M-3; 12-14 ft wingspan
The Jatewoone is also known as the cleaverbeak or marsh bird.
Standing 9' tall and endowed with Swan-like necks and long,
powerful legs, these white waterfowl sport a scarlet band across the
eyes. From a distance they might look like a large crane, although
they are not of that family. Their beak is a light grey with the
exception of the sharp, brilliant indigo dorsal ridge from which
they get their name. Extending from this ridge over their head and
thrusting out behind is a crest of feathers of the the same color.
Birds of prey in every sense, their legs end in talons that can grip
even small creatures tightly, and their beaks are made for tearing.
Jatewoones live on snakes, fish, and small mammals. Their
reputation for hostility comes from their protection of their nests
which are usually hidden in swampy areas. They will also attack
when they are surprised by noisy people. These birds are incredibly strong and, with their superior height, can do terrible damage
to the normal human, often splitting the skull. They can also use
their large talons with great effectiveness. Jatewoones mate for life
and produce one or two eggs every year or every other year.
Usually only one of the fledglings will survive. These young
Jatewoones grow at a remarkable pace, reaching three-quarters
of their full height in only one year and are fully mature by two.
Jatewoones can fly, but if the need to escape danger arises, it is
more common to see them running at high speeds, using still water
areas for cover.

nas-SUVWZ,CPH,ELQ-5; 9ft wingspan

The Desert Orao is the principal native Eagle of Far Harad.
It is quite similar to the Eagles of the North, except that the environment has forced him to play the role of scavenger as well as
hunter. These soaring hunters swoop to attack smaller birds or prey
on the ground. Unlike the northern birds, the desert Eagle will as
readily eat carrion as fresh meat. This is an adaptation made
necessary by the environment. They are aggressive enough to
strike travellers along Harad's southern caravan roads.
Aside from Men, the Orao are the dominant hunters on the vast
plains of southwestern Harad. Their eyries are set in the caverns
of the northern Yellow Mountains, and in wind-hollowed caves the
highest of the hills east of the hilly Raj region to the north. In size,
they are no match for the Great Eagles, but they are large enough
to carry off a shepherd's goat or lamb.
PlED SWANS:

wmk-FM,HP,Y-5;6ft wingspan

Handsome aquatic birds, Pied Swans may be the most intelligent of herbivorous avians. They seem able to remember those
who have harmed or helped them (at least for periods of several
weeks), and there have been reports of pied Swans leading fog-lost
travellers to high ground in marshes. Various rural and primitive
peoples, such as the Marshmen of the Nindalf, revere these birds
as being sacred to the Vala Yavanna. They are creamy white in
color, liberally splotched and speckled with black and gray.
Unfortunately, their flesh is tasty and their feathers soft, so that
those with more greed than reverence hunt them. Pied Swans are
most commonly found in the Nindalf and along the shores of the
Anduin in the relatively unspoiled areas of Ithilien.
POND BATS:

mk-FM,CDHP,QR-6;2.5fl wingspan

A small black creature, the Pond Bat rarely attacks Men or Elves
unless panicked and confused, or trapped. It is, however, a noted
carrier of fleas and other parasites, which it leaves in isolated
dwellings and camps. Thus, they are a common cause of Cyclic
Fever.

Animal Glossary: Bats and Birds
RAVENS: ktc-AFMW,CDHP,ERY-4:4-5ft wingspan
Ravens are among the more intelligent birds to be found in
Middle-earth. Not as noble nor as wise as the Great Eagles (see
below). Ravens are nevertheless on the side of good — unlike all
too many of their lesser Corvidae cousins. They are reputedly the
messengers of the Vala Námo (Mandos) and are associated with
Fate and Prescience. The Ravens of Erebor befriended and
counselled the Dwarves of the Line of Durin during the Third Age.
These noble birds live a long time: Roäc of Erebor lived past 150
years of age. Brilliant and somewhat enchanted, most Ravens can
speak the tongues of the Free Peoples (or at least of Men and Elves;
the tongue of the Dwarves is too secret and that of the Ents too
lengthy for ravens to learn).
Conjurers have long sought out the foreknowledge of Ravens.
Roäc son of Care of Erebor. Roäc was a very old bird when he
brought Thorin Oakenshield and his company news of what had
been happening while the Dwarves (and one Hobbit named
Bilbo Baggins) were scouting about the cave of Smaug the
Dragon. Of course, at this point he had lost much of his strength
and keen eyesight, although he was still counted the wisest of
Ravens.
RED EAGLES: mkt-AF.CD,EL-6; 4.5ft body, 25ft wingspan
The Red Eagle dominates the skies of the East. Smaller relatives
of the Great Eagles, who are rare in eastern Endor, these magnificent predators are relatively numerous and pose a threat to travellers in the Red Mountains and Mountains of the Wind. Fortunately,
though, they usually prefer to hunt goats, sheep, or wild horses.
Red Eagles are known for the deep red hue that accents the tips of
their gold-colored plumage. They have scarlet beaks.
SEA EAGLES: hmkt-OS,DJ,EY-7;3.5ft body, I 5 f t wingspan
Smaller, swifter kinsmen of the fierce Red Eagles, Sea Eagles
live along the coasts of the Romenëar (Q. "East Sea") and the
eastern Haragaer(S. "South Sea"). There, they hunt sea mammals,
large fish that swin near the surface, and even sea turtles. The bane
of Water Drakes, Sea Eagles are often worshipped as saviors by the
seafaring tribes of the remote eastern isles. Sea Eagles have
yellowish-gold underplumage and blue-green feathers on the tops
of their backs and wings. They have golden beaks.
THRUSHES: wmkt-E, FL, A, CDH-3, 12-18 inches
Thrushes are large songbirds. Nearly as intelligent and gifted as
ravens, they are among Radagast the Brown's principal messengers and scouts. They are also long-time friends of wise Men in
many regions, but especially in Erebor and the Dale. Dwarves
admire them, but cannot communicate with them because the
Thrushes speak too quickly and in too high pitched voices (one
would imagine that Ents would have similar problems). The
Thrush language can, however, be learned by Men and Elves who
care enough to make a study of such things. Thrushes are very keen
eyed and have a strong streak of curiosity in them, so they make
excellent scouts.
The Old Thrush of Erebor. This wise old bird helped Thorin and
Company find the secret entrance to Smaug's cave. He also
brought the Dwarves a Raven, so that his other observations
could be translated to the Thorin. Then, the Old Thrush warned
Bard the Bowman of Smaug's weak spot.

SHORT-EARED OWLS: wmktc-BM,CDHP,QR-7;3ft wing-span
A rare day-hunting Owl, the Short-eared Owl is quite.
Like many other Endorian birds, however, it is an intelligent
perceptive creature. They were taught by the Elves to speak and
have their own language. One who is close to Nature can get
helpful information from them.
VAULT SHRIKES: wmkt—UV,ELQR-6; 6-12 inches
The Vault Shrike is a tiny, bright red Bat with a long no
tongue with which it pokes into holes and crevices for insect:
It also secretes from its tongue a highly toxic nerve poison
enables it to deal with larger prey. These the Vault Shrike
paralyzes or kills by means of the poison. It then rips its victim
to shreds with its tiny sharp teeth.
The Vault Shrike's diet is further enhanced by its ability to catch
small frogs in an ironically froglike manner: by snatching the prey
midleap with that long tongue. Vault Shrikes get their name from
their unnerving, shrieking cry. They are only found in Moria
the caverns of the Misty Mountains.
VEREUT EAGLES: tnkt-BF,CDP,ILR-5; 20 inch body,
6 ft wingspan
The Vereut Eagle inhabits the hills of eastern Eriador. It is blue
over most of its body and wings, but its hue reaches a dark purple
near the face and wing tips. The Eagle's beak and eyes standout in
stark contrast, for they both are a bright yellow color. While
hunting, they fly silently, low to the ground, enabling them to
the tops of hills and ridges to surprise their favorite prey: Gophers
and Rock Hydrax. This method of hunting is startling to those
are unacquainted with the beasts, and many an Eriadoran has
suddenly found himself in a brief, bewildering combat at the crest
of a hill. Several Dunlanders wear scars on their faces attesting that
these chance meetings can be dangerous.

Animal Glossary: Locations of Bats and Bird's

13

14

5.2 WATER BEASTS
Overseen by the Vala Ulmo, water beasts live in the pools, lakes,
rivers, and oceans that cover most of Arda. Those that reside in the
open seas owe allegiance to the Maia Ossë, the Singer; those that
inhabit the inland seas and freshwaters (even deep below the earth)
pay homage to the Maie Uinen, Ossë's calm, quite spouse. Men
know little about either group of these varied and colorful creatures.
As a whole, the ocean-dwelling beasts have suffered the greatest
harm at the hands of Morgoth. The Black Enemy's brief seduction
of Ossë resulted in the introduction of many awful monsters into
the seas. Because of Uinen's intervention, Ossë repented and
Morgoth's domination proved short-lived, but these foul creatures
continue to plague seafarers and
prey upon Ulmo's flock. More
importantly, Ossë and his animal
minions remain a fiery and capricious lot and, unlike Uinen and
the creatures of the freshwaters,
pose an unpredictable threat to
those who dare ply the waves.
CARNANTOR: hnw-OS,LY-8;
males 12 f t , females 45 ft
Huge ocean-dwelling Eels, the
Camantor (Q. "Red Maws"; sing.
"Camanto") are among the most
dangerous of water beasts. They
reside in the reefs in the eastern
portions of the South Sea (S.
"Haragaer") and the southern
reaches of the East Sea (Q. "Romenear"), favoring the ample shelter, rich food sources, and warm
waters off Endor's southeastern
coast. These seemingly everhungry denizens of the undersea
shelf subsist on sharks and other
large fish, battling Kraken,
Whales, and Fell Turtles for control of the waters. Carantor are
particularly dominant and dangerous in spring, when the Eels
return to their spawning grounds
off the coasts of Waw and, Cevra,
Arth, and Vulm Shryac. Then, the
bright red and silver beasts crowd the reefs, feeding and mating in
an awe-inspiring frenzy.
The male Caranto is up to 12 feet long, while the female reaches
lengths of 45 feet.
CHERETHRYND: nwmk-O-7; 50 ft
Powerful Sperm Whales, Cherethrynd (S. "Hallmaw"; sing.
"Charothrond") reside in the deep waters of the Belegaer, off the
western coasts of Middle-earth. Unlike most Whales, they sport
teeth—nine inch long teeth — and they hunt fish and Squid rather
than consuming krill through a baleen strainer. The Charothrond's
favorite food and most dangerous rival is the Giant Squid.
Although wily and capable of upsetting a good-sized vessel,
Cherethrynd are vulnerable to the ruthless Umharean whalers who

Animal Glossary: Water Beasts
sail the oceans near the Bay of Belfalas. These Men hunt lone
Whales for their oil, bone, and ambergris. (The latter is an
indigestible chalky substance that forms around Squid beaks and,
in spite of its hideous smell, makes wonderful perfumes.)
ERIS SQUIDS: hn-OS,L-6; 1ft
This small tentacled sea creature is found along the Mûmakani
coast, in the warm South Sea. It is hunted by alchemists and others
who prepare magical substances for its ink. The exact use of this
solution in magical preparations is not known to those outside this
isolated southern region of Middle-earth. Mûmakani and Kiran
peoples, however, prize the substance for its ability to produce
camouflage paste and invisible ink.
LAMPREY: hnwmkt,OS-3;2ft
A cylindrical, grey, jawless
fish, the Lamprey is a parasite
that attaches itself to other creatures, like a leech with a circular
maw. It then remains in place,
slowly burrowing into the flesh
and swallowing blood until
sated. (A wound from a Lamprey will bleed at a rate of two
hits/round for each round it was
in place.)
LEECH: hnwmkt,FM-3; 6-9
inches
While lauded for its medicinal qualities in some cultures,
the Leech is only considered a
nuisance in the delta. These
nasty, slug-like creatures fasten
to anything warm-blooded and
use their serrated tongue to rasp
through to a blood vessel. Then
they remain fixed to their prey,
gorging themselves until they
are so full that slip off.
MERCHAITHRAIS: hnwmkS,LY-5;12ft
The
Shadowhorn,
or
"Morchaithras" (pi. "Merchaithrais" or "Morchaithrais"), is a
large, flat, black Ray equipped with a long, whiplike tail. Its tail
is studded with short but exceptionally sharp barbs that deliver
knifelike cuts and inject victims with a powerful (3rd lvl) muscle
venom. The Ray's expanded pectoral fins form triangular wings
that extend along its head and trunk, giving the fish a diamond
shape. The tips of these wings are equipped with (3rd lvl)
electricity-producing organs that can stun (RR failure 01 -75 for 1 10 rds) or immobilize (RR failure 76+ for 1-20 rds) a swimmer.
Merchaithrais prefer to swim along the bottom of the coastal
shelf, burrowing themselves in the sand near shoals in order to
await their prey. When waiting, their gill openings and slitlike
mouths are well protected, for they are located on the Rays' undersides. While swimming, they flap their pectoral fins and move
gracefully mid quickly through the water, as if flying.

Animal Glossary: Locations of Water Beasts
15

Animal Glossary: Water Beasts

16
MULKÁNAR: nwmkt,OS-7;9ft
Largest member of the mussel family, the Mulkána is a giant,
hard-shelled bivalve with a black shell that protects its soft, white
body. This molusk is related to the Giant Clam, although it is
larger, quicker, and has a long, vaguely oval, shell. It secretes a
foul, acidic, ink (3rd lvl) which stuns larger prey (1 -20 rds), kills
smaller victims, and slowly eats away skin.
Found off the eastern shores of Endor, Mulkánar are hunted for
their huge (and reputedly enchanted) pearls. At least one of these
precious jewels, the priceless Womaw Moon, exceeds six inches
in diameter. Legend proclaims that the larger of these pearls serve
as Seeing-stones, although none is as powerful as a Númenórean
Palantír.
NÍMAEARGYRTH: hnwmk-OS,Y-6; 15-21 ft
Elves call the deadliest of the Endor's Sharks Nímaeargurth:
"White Seadeath" (pi. "Nímaeargyrth"). Typically large (15+
feet) and always hungry, these unsleeping killers hunt virtually
anything that has flesh that they can tear apart and eat. Even
wounded Whales have felt the wrath of these white (underparts)
and grey (overparts) denizens of the sea.
The Nimaeargurth's long, pointed snout is equipped with nine
rows of flat, triangular teeth. Those of the outermost row are six
to eight inches long. When broken off, the teeth are replaced by
those of the next row, enabling the Shark to replenish its saw-like
weaponry.
Like all Sharks, the Nimaeargurth is a cartilage-skeletoned fish.
It bears live-young, usually in litters of 7-9 Sharklings.
PlKE: mkt,FM-4;4-7 feet
The Pike is vicious, and is renowned as the shark of the
fresh waters. It has a powerful jaw and wicked teeth, and once it has
a hold it will not let go unless it is seriously wounded or it succeeds
in biting off a healthy piece of its victim. Pike feed on crustaceans
and shellfish when young, graduating to larger prey as they age.
Adults eat fish and small mammals. Fortunately, Pike rarely attack
a swimmer. This is particularly reassuring to the Rivermen of
Calenardhon (Rohan), since Pike grow up to 7' in length in the
Onodl6 (Entwash).
NOTE: Once bitten, a victim will not be attacked again, but
they must roll an additional attack to knock the fish loose,
with no subtractions for DB, armor etc.
SARNIIMENI:

hnw-FM,LY-6;

males 6 ft, females 18 ft

Distantly related to the Carnantor, the Sarnúmeni (Q. "Weststones"; sing. "Sarnúmen") are large, hard-skinned, freshwater
Eels. Their name is derived from their grey, horny, scales, which
lend a Sarnúmen tremendous protection and enable them to burrow
in riverbeds, camouflaging themselves as rocks. Since the midSecond Age, when they came from their original home in Númenor
and were carelessly introduced into the rivers and lakes of southern
Endor, they have become the dominant hunter in the watershed of
the Yellow Mountains (S. Ered Laranor"; Q. "Orolanari").

Aside from great strength and huge teeth, Sarnúmeni are noted
for having deadly barbs along their spine. These barbs are
connected with poison glands, and anyone stepping on or handling
one of these formidable Eels is indanger of being injected with a
bluish nerve poison named for the Sarnúmen. Herbalists have been
known to refine this liquid, creating a lethal (30th) poison that is
feared all over southern Middle-earth. Fortunately, the liquid has
an exceedingly limited life of its own and is extremely hard (-30)
to handle without exposing oneself to its effects.
STURGEON: mkt.FMS-4; 4-7 feet
The granddaddy of all freshwater fish, the Sturgeon grows up to
18' long in still waters. It is has a scaly skin, which is protected by
five rows of bony scutes along its sides. Normally very docile, one
of these formidable creatures will only attack if its lair is disturbed.
Then, it thrashes about angrily, perhaps ramming or upsetting any
nearby river craft.
Grey and silver, the Sturgeon resides in shallow seas and rivers,
feeding on the worms, mollusks, crustaceans, and small fish that
live on or near the bottom. They are prized for their meat and their
exceedingly tasty eggs.
ULMODILI: hnwmk-OS,Y-6; 15-21 ft
No water creature is as intelligent or blessed as the Ulmodil (Q.
"Friend of Ulmo"; pl. "Ulmodili"), the beautiful blue and white
Dolphin (Porpoise). Seaborne mammals, they are servants of
Ulmo (as opposed to Ossë) and fast allies of the Teleri. Their
complex society and wide-ranging schools enable them to act with
startling unity when summoned by their master or friends, or when
arroused by their enemies.
The gregarious Ulmodili live in hierarchical groups of 10-200
individuals, which in turn join to form schools of 100-2000
creatures. Playful and agile, they roll and leap along the surface of
the open sea, moving at speeds of up to 40 miles an hour. When
they submerge, they can dive as deep as 1000 feet and stay down
for as long as five minutes before they need to resurface (they
breathe through lungs, not gills).
An Ulmodil has smooth blue (top) and white (bottom) skin and
a long beaked snout. This snout is a formidable, mace-like weapon
that contains an array of short, sharp teeth. Its bulging forehead
encases a pad of fat that houses a sonar-like organ that enables the
creature to detect objects with stunning accuracy.
VESSINO CLAMS: hnwm-OS-8; 3-6 inches
The Vessino Clam is a rare mollusk which is found only in the
deep waters of the Haragaer and the southern Belegaer. A source
of a valuable ingredient for a healing balm that soothes and heals
bums, it is prized by Lay Healers and Medicinists. Its beautiful,
silvery shell is also noted as an exquisite ornament.
WELS: mkt,FM-6; 5-10 feet
A species of giant catfish, the Wels is an ugly brute. They are
usually up to 4-5' long, but sometimes reach 10'. A larger Wels
weighs nearly 700 lbs. It has a rounded body with a flattened head
and a wide, horizontal mouth, around which are two long sensory
barbels and four short ones. Wels are known to swallow prey
whole and will sometimes bash boats to see what falls out.

17

Animal Glossary: Potili

5.3 POTILI (INSECTS & SPIDERS)
The most numerous of Endor's creatures, the Potili (Q. "Manyfooted") comprise all the arthropods (many-segmented creatures)
— insects, arachnids, crustaceans, etc. — everything from Ants to
Great Spiders. These beasts are invertebrates with exoskeletons
and multi-segmented bodies. They occupy every ecological niche.
Because of their variety, the Potili command the attention of
Oromë (and to a lesser degree), Ulmo, and Manwë. They are
considered one of the lowest orders of the Kelvar, however, and it
is the Maiar who oversee their progress and well-being.

astounding coordination. Worse, their carefully hidden nests are
hard (-20) to spot; when any unfortunate being steps in or near the
nest, the Ground Bees, warned by the vibrations, swarm out and
mob the unlucky intruder. Multiple stings can cause temporary
weakness and even paralysis. Like other Bees, Ground Bees
produce honey, but their underground location makes the prospect
of stunning the Bees with smoke and harvesting the honey rather
unattractive, so any Ground Bees that have made their nests far
from Bear-infested regions (such as forests or hills) can hoard their
treasure unmolested.
H U M M E R H O R N S : See Monsters, Section 6.4.

CLIFF HORNETS: wmkst-AFLV,CDH,LUX-4, 1 inch
Relatives of the common Mud Dauber Wasp, Cliff Hornets are
social insects who build their nest in cracks, crevices, and fissures
in the sides of cliffs. Although they will not build nests deep
underground, their homes can sometimes be found as much as
several hundred feet from a cave entrance if a good nesting site can
be found there. These insects are not normally dangerous unless
one is an intruder who has blundered into the midst of a nest. Then
the outraged Hornets will attack en masse with their sharp, barbless
stingers, injecting the victim with a venom that will, at m i n i m u m ,
cause pain and swelling. In addition, many people are allergic to
Cliff Hornet venom and may die from its effects.
NOTE: Treat Hornet venom as a first level poison. A
normal, non-allergic reaction is -25 to all actions for 11 -30
hours. There is a 35% chance (01-35) of allergic reaction,
a percentage that may he modified by the victim's
Constitution. In the case of an allergic reaction, an incapacitating fever and respiratory distress will afflict the
victim for 1-4 days, and five or more stings may cause death
in I to 10 hours.
GELYNGYL: hnwmkt-M,CDJ,X-6; 3-4 feet
Gelyngyl (S. "Green Spiders"; sing. "Galungol") are the largest
of the so-called "Animal Spiders" — that is. Spiders that are not
monsters. Deep green on top and light green on their undersides,
they are difficult to discern in a thick forest. Their coloring,
coupled with their arboreal nature, makes them very hard (-20) to
discern when they are in their natural habitat.
Hiding in dense foilage, the rapacious Galungol hangs above
animal trails and other areas where its prey might be active, waiting
to drop upon unwary victims. Then it injects a powerful (6th lvl)
reduction poison into any soft tissue it can find, immobilizing its
potential kill before carrying it off to the Spider's web home.
Gelyngyl webs are located in clusters set high in the trees.
Unlike most of its relatives, Green Spiders are exceptionally
social and are prone to attack and feed in groups of ten or more.
Acting in unison, they are capable of surrounding and herding their
victims into traps. Each Galungol has a pad on each of its four rear
legs, and the Spider can rub its legs together to create the sounds
with which it communicates.
GROUND BEES: mskt-FLV,HP,R-4; .5 inches to 1 inch
Striped with bright yellow and black like their distant cousins
theYellow jackets but fuzzy like any true bee, Ground Bees make
their nests in abandoned burrows previously belonging to such
creatures as Rabbits, Ground Squirrels, and Culcarnix. They are
social insects who present a hazard because of their numbers and

MABELMAIKLI: hwmskt-M,OS,LY-6; 6-7 feet
Sharp-claws (Q. "Mabelmaikli") are huge creatures with eight
appendages. They resemble a cross between a Crab and a Squid
and inhabit the inland seas of Rhûnen, Nûrnen, Dushera and the
sheltered coastal shelves between the Bay of Helcar (in the
Romenëar) and the Bay of Ormal (in the Haragaer). Because they
are enamoured of rich, somewhat briny water, though, Mabelmaikli can thrive in any marsh, delta, lake, or ocean where there is
a little salt. They are most common in Mordor and in the waters off
Arg-Simorîg.
Mabelmaikli feed on Starfish, Shellfish, and submarine Worms,
but they will attack any animal that comes within reach of their four
nimble, steely claws. Each of these pincers is 1 -2 feet in diameter
and can crush a Man with ease. Together, they present a frightening array. Actually, they are simply the creature's four forward,
grasping appendages, and are used to immobilize prey. The
Mabelmaikla tears its victims apart with nine inch mandibles and
four pairs of mouth parts.
Like their Crab relatives, Sharp-claws propel themselves backwards when they swim, but they move much faster, often at speeds
of up to fifteen miles an hour. Generally, though, they prefer to
burrow and remain inactive until their prey happens by. Their
ability to lay an ambush is legend, especially among the slavefishermen of Num. After all, Mabelmaikli are huge, bright purple
denizens that one would expect to see with relative ease. By using
refined instincts and the cover of their burrows and murky waters,
however, these beasts hide very well.
Sharp-claws make excellent feeding machines. They 'hear'
with sensors in their four legs and smell and feel with their three
foot long antennae. Pain does not affect them. (They cannot be
stunned.) Once a Mabelmaikla senses a prospective kill, it darts
forward and embraces its victim with one or more pincers. Then
it smells the prey with its feet, analyzing the pinioned creature's
worth as food.
NEEKERBREEKERS: wmsktc-M,H,E-3; 1-2 inches
Noisy, cricket-like insects that are found in marshy areas in the
northerly regions of Endor (e.g., Arthedain), Neekerbreekers are
little more than a major nuisance. Their name is derived from their
noisy, incessant night cry. Those experienced with and accustomed to travel in these regions soon learn to tolerate the sound of
Neekerbreekers, but travellers carrying dried grains, flour, or
waybread are well advised to keep these supplies tightly wrapped
in areas where the hideous "neek-breek, neek-breek!" can be
heard, since Neekerbreekers have been known to infest and devour
such food.

18

Animal Glossary: Locations of Potilis

19

Animal Glossary: Potili & Rávatsar
Neekerbreekers are found in particularly foul swamps. Gigantic
relatives of the mosquito, these carnivores prefer solid meat. So,
while it does not suck blood, a Neekerbreeker will appropriate
small chunks of a man's flesh. Any wound indicted by a Neekerbreeker has a chance of being infected with Yellow Rheum, a 0
level illness.
MORGAI FLIES: askt-MUVW,HP,ELQX-3: 1 inch
Vicious, biting, parasitic insects, Morgai Flies are one of the
nasty nuisances of life in Mordor. They can found all over the
Black Land, particularly in Gorgoroth, where they are known as
Orcflies. Their sole food is blood, but enjoy feeding off nearly any
beast they can find.
Relatives of common Horseflies, Morgai Flies are large and
dun, gray, or black in color, with red eyes and a red blotch, like
Sauron's Lidless Eye, on their backs. Many chroniclers believe
them to be monsters of the Dark Lord's design. This may be true
of some of the larger subgroups, but those of the basic v a r i e t y are
simply huge, primeval vermin.
Morgai Flies carry virtually all bloodborne diseases, and they
played a major part in spreading the Great Plague of T.A. 16361637.
ÛLCERCAIN: hnw-FM,DJ,INX-4; 6-9 inches
Ûlceracin (sing. "Ylcarcan") are large, red, centipede-like creatures that move in hordes across the dense forests of southeastern
Endor. Nocturnal creatures, they feed on rotting vegetation, insects, carrion, and (occasionally) live prey. They are extremely
quick and are capable of scaling trees and swimming across placid
water. Like ants, they operate in rigidly-defined social groups, if
necessary swarming to defend their lairs. Ûlcercain generally
reside in rotting logs.
Most of the so-called "Evil Fangs" are harmless to the Children
of Iluvatar; however, the "warriors" that comprise about twenty
percent of any colony will attack virtually anything and anyone.
Immobilized or sleeping folk need be careful around these creatures. Armed with powerful 2-3 inch mandibles and a mild (lvl 0)
nerve venom, a group of Warrior Ûlcercain can slay and clean a
Man in a matter of minutes.

5.4 RÁVATSAR (AMPHIBIANS &
REPTILES)
Rávatsar (Q. "Wildclaws"; sing. "Rávatsa") constitute all the
amphibians and reptiles. These creatures include the Angwi (Q.
"Snakes"; sing. "Ango"), the Assangar (Q. "Crocodiles"; sing.
, "Assanga"; l i t . "Ironmouths"), the Leukalankor (Q. "Lizards";
sing. "Leukalanko"; lit. "Loosethroats"), the Oiratelmrar (Q.
"Turtles"; sing. "Oiratelmra"; lit. "Eternal Shells"), and the Kabori
(Q. "Frogs"; sing. "Kabor"), etc. Closest to the Oromë's Maia
servant Leukë, they are cold-blooded beasts that lay eggs and are
often confused with monsters (Q. "Ulgundor").
ANDODAILION: mkt-ABUV,HP,LR-6; 2.5-3 feet
The Andodaio, or "Gate-shadow" (pl. "Andodailion"), is a
black, nocturnal lizard with a prehensile tongue and tail. It is
without doubt the greatest climber among all the Rávatsar. Rugged
landscapes and subterranean settings accommodate this creature
quite well, for the Andodaio is insulated with an unusual array of
the three layers of hollow scales that enable it to survive in environments which are far too cool for its brethren. Hanging from
rocks, it swings across the caves and precipices, leaping onto prey
and tearing its victims appart with its steely claws.
Larger creatures would have little to fear from the Andodailion,
except for the fact that they live in large communities and often
hunt in groups of 10-100 individuals. Unusually social, a horde of
Andodailion can easily fell a Man by attacking in concert.
ANGUSAIWÉLI: hnawmskt-(All)-7; 9-18 inches
Found virtually anywhere in Middle-earth, save in the coldest
climes, the Angusaiwë (Q. "Iron Unbirds"; pi. "Angusaiwéli") is
the most resilient, advanced, and common of the larger Rávatsar.
This is due to the fact that they are, unlike any other reptile or
amphibian, warm-blooded. The Angusaiwé1i constitute a unique
branch of the Rávatsar and are closely related to flightless birds;
thus their name.
There are nine species of Angusaiwéli. All are deep grey or
black in color and have bright red eyes. The only notable distinction in the family is between those that run on four legs (three
species), those that run on two legs (five species), and those that
hop (one species). The former group consists of the species that
live near the water, especially along rocky seashores. All other
Angusaiwéli have exaggerated hind legs and walk upright, using
their tails for balance. Astoundingly agile, they can travel over
rugged terrain at speeds exceeding 35 miles an hour. The Leaping
Unbird found in Khand and Chey is the slowest of these creatures;
however, they are astoundingly efficient and need less water and
sustenance than other Angusaiwéli.
Poisonous carnivores, Unbirds hunt lizards, frogs, birds, large
insects, and small mammals. They have very sharp teeth and
curving, retractable, viper-like fangs. When facing most foes,
though, they bite their prey while keeping these foreteeth hidden
in pockets in their upper jaw. Angusaiwéli prefer to swallow their
victims whole. Against larger foes, they can bear their hollow,
needle-like fangs and puncture the unfortunate beasts' hides,
injecting a potent (3rd lvl) venom that immobilizes (1 -100 rds with
RR failure 01-65) or kills (in 1-10 rds with RR failure of 66+).

20

Animal Glossary: Locations of Rávatsar

21

Animal Glossary: Rávatsar
Aside from its great speed, an Angusaiwë relies on its cunning
and horny body armor in combat. It has a ridge of pointed scales
that protects its spine, and the scales on its back and sides are, as
its name suggests, as tough as iron.
NOTE: The Angusaiwéli are found on a number of ICE's
covers, for they are active at all hours and savor action.
BLUE TERRAPINS: mkt-FM,CD,E-4; 3-3.5 feet
Blue Terrapins (Q. "Luinikrúmori"; sing. "Luinikrúmor") arc
only found in thickets or very dense, overgrown swamp areas.
Their native home is Fangorn Forest. Small, their shells average
18" across, but they have a 12" neck. Thus, a Blue Terrapin can
strike like a snake, delivering a 2nd level muscle poison (with a
Critical Strike) that can paralyze a small mammal (up to 40 lbs). If
it bites, it will paralyze the area or limb it penetrates, partially
paralyzing one adjacent area. The poison wears off in 3 hours.
COIREALS: mkt-FM,CDH-5: 2-3 feet
This inoffensive snake inhabits forests and heavy copses; it can
be readily identified by the bright yellow bands on its glossy black
body. It is generally docile and will avoid people. Most bites occur
when witless folk try to pick up this "pretty snake." Instead, the
Coireal is happy to hunt large insects. It should be left alone, for
its venom is highly potent, one of the most lethal (10th lvl) natural
poisons in Middle-earth. Symptoms appear in one to four hours,
resulting in all but certain death from paralysis.
ËGIL'S VIPERS: mskt-BF,P,IL-6; 20ft
A huge, poisonous, predatory serpent. Ëgil's Viper is one of the
strangest hazards of the plain of Talath Harroch, south of Mirkwood. It is said that these remarkable snakes were driven out of
other areas of Rhovanion into the Talath Harroch, but this seems
unlikely at best. In any case, the serpents are there, preying upon
eggs, rodents, young animals, and (in the case of the largest Vipers)
Men and Kine. Of a yellowish-brown color that blends well w i t h
the soil of the area, and with the grasses of the plain in dry seasons
and in the autumn, Ëgil's Viper hunts in the late afternoon or early
evening. It may spit its venom into a victim's eyes from a distance
up to thirty feet, or it may bite and inject the venom in the normal
manner of most snakes. The Viper's fangs reach up to three inches
in length and can penetrate leather and, in some cases, even chain
armor.
FELL BEASTS: See Flying Monsters, Section 6.4., p.53
GREY FLYERS: wmkt-FM,CDJ,E-7; 1-2 inches
A slimy, silvery, gliding frog, the Grey Flyer is a small but
deadly amphibian. They carry a nasty venom in their bluish claws.
Grey Flyers are rare, living only in the depths of thick rain forests,
but they live in huge colonies and woe to anyone who stumbles
upon their nests!

GREEN ASPS: wmkt-BF,HP-5; 2-3 ft
The Green Asp is the only venomous serpent indigenous to
Calenardhon (Rohan) and the northern White Mountains. It is a
sociable creature (for a snake), making its home with as many as
fifty of its fellows in empty Rabbit or Ground Squirrel burrows. On
sunny days, the Asp community will come out to sun themselves
en masse on the slopes near their subterranean home.
Green Asps have dull green skin and are usually fat and torpid,
with puffy poison glands below their eyes. They are considered
unattractive even by those fond of serpents. Their fetid odor,
reminiscent of rotting strawberries, does nothing to relieve this
unpleasant impression. The (5th lvl) bite of this snake is rarely
fatal, but the area surrounding the wound generally becomes
necrotic, turning awful shades of violet and yellow-green before
sloughing off, usually exposing the bone. These dreadful afflictions may take months to heal. In some cases (15% chance,
modified by Co stat bonus), the snake's injection may even cause
the entire limb to turn gangrenous and fall off. Regardless of the
primary effects, however, the victim will in any case be incapacitated for 3-6 days with a high fever and hallucinations.
LAND TORTOISES: mkt-BFMS,CD.E-8; 5-6 feet
Land Tortoises were once common in southern Eriador and
western Gondor, particularly in the Gwathló basin. Unfortunately,
they are extremely tasty and nutritious, so they are favored by
Eriadoran hunters and are nearly extinct. Their beautiful green and
grey shells are now exceptionally rare. Prized for their value as
armor (the shell makes excellent reinforcement) and (when
ground) as a source of medicine to combat blood diseases and
ailments, a Land Tortoise shell can bring up to two hundred gold
pieces on the open market.
Very slow and inoffensive, the Land Tortoise's primary defense
is its size. The average specimen is five feet long and three high,
weighing about three hundred pounds. A few older Tortoises,
those with ages over three hundred years, have reached six feet in
length and weigh over a quarter ton.
In the case of an attack, Land Tortoises will retreat until
cornered. If confronted by an overwhelming number of foes, they
w i l l then ground themselves and pull into their shells. If it appears
that they contest the attack, though, they may lash out with their
necks, biting the attackers with their hard, sharp beaks.
Land Tortoises feed on nearly every type of vegetation and often
roam into the highlands in search of richer grass or shrubs. They
mate at any time, since the males are twice as large as the females.
Female Tortoises then dig holes along river banks or on the
seashore, laying their (11-20) eggs and covering them with moist
soil that hardens in the sun and incubates the young. These caches
are abandoned, so the hatchlings are forced to dig their way out and
survive on their own.
M A R S H ADDERS: wmk-M-5; 2-4 ft
The Marsh Adder is a large, aquatic serpent common throughout
all marshy areas of central Endor. Especially prevalent in the Dead
Marshes and Nindalf (the Wetwang), this creature is an excellent
swimmer whose mottled gray and brown scales allow it to go all
but unnoticed in the foul waters of the marshes.

22
Marsh Adders are easily startled and bite with little provocation.
Usually seeking out small creatures such as ducklings and frogs for
prey, the Adder will also attack larger beings if it feels threatened.
Its large, curved fangs allow it to deliver its poison deeply, so that
it quickly takes effect. The (10th lvl) venom can be lethal and many
victims (RR failure of 51+) die in five rounds due to respiratory
paralysis. A less imposing dose (RR failure of 01 -50) will give the
victim a case of flaccid paralysis: their joints will become limp, and
they will lose voluntary muscle control for 1-100 hours.
MARSH CROCODILES: hnwm-FM-5; 15-18 ft
Swift but usually inactive, the Marsh, or "Fish-eating," Crocodiles are common in the wetter, wanner parts of Endor. They are
inoffensive when let alone, but can be quite deadly when surprised
(or hungry). Black, with green stripes and light blue undersides,
they are colorful carnivores.
Its diet consists of large mammals and birds who enter or come
to the edge of the water in search of food or drink. After grabbing
its prey in its long, powerful snout, the Marsh Crocodile drowns the
victim and then tears the flacid body apart with twisting bites. This
involves spinning its entire body, but the beast is exceptionally
agile when its in the water.
The Marsh Crocodile spends
its nights in the water and basks on
the shore during the days the sun
is out. It feeds on an average of
once every two days. While
swimming, it uses the rocks it
swallows for ballast. Its nostrils
and throat are equipped with flaps
and valves that enable it to stay
under water for extended periods
without fear of intaking part of the
marsh or river.
NETHAIRIN: mkt-FM,CD, E-4;
5-7 feet
The Plains Snake (Si.
"Nathair"; pl. "Nethairin") is
roughly six feet long. It has a thick
triangular head and a cream-colored body overlaid with a dark
diamond pattern. Hiding in shallow burrows and hunting amidst
the tall grass of the steppes or plains, the serpent is a quiet creature
that relies on stealth and patience in order to defeat its foes.
Rodents, birds, and small lizards make up its diet.
Although ostensibly cunning, the Nathair angers easily and will
vigorously defend itself rather than flee, even in a fruitless confrontation. Its venom is rather toxic (level 6). Symptoms include
swelling, weak pulse, shock, and wide discolorations.
NETHAIRIN ERDYR: mktcf-AUW,HT,L-4; 2-3feet
The Nethairin Erdyr (sing "Nathair Ardor") live in burrows
beneath rocks or within caverns and favor highland locales or the
cool wastelands of the North.
While very similar in coloration to the Nathair of the Plains, the
Nathair Ardor attains a length of only 2-3 feet. It angers easily and
will defend itself viciously. Its poison is similar to that of the
common Nathair, however it is weaker (5th lvl) and takes longer
(6 vs 2 minutes) to affect the victim.

Animal Glossary: Rávatsar
NETHRAICH: wmk-M-5; 3-5feet
The Nathrach (pl "Nethraich") is an aquatic snake that resides in
relatively placid or stagnant pools, marshes, and lakes. Brown
bands surround its rust-colored body, which typically measures
three to five feet in length.
Contrary to popular belief, this serpent does not normally strike
in water; most victims are on dry land or a marsh island when they
stray into a snake run. These snakes only attack when their "runs"
are encountered, and then it bites with astounding quickness. A
Nathrach's critical strike is accompanied by a muscle poison that
causes bleeding, bruises, and swelling (double all these effects on
this and subsequent criticals). The venom is not very toxic (level
2) but does cause bleeding, bruises, and swelling. It is designed to
stun small rodents before the snake envelops and crushes them.
The Arnathrach (pl "Ernaithrach"), or Royal Nathrach, is a
much larger cousin that inhabits the brackish waters near the
coasts.
OTROVATIVI: hwsa-BFMUZ,CDP,IRX-4; 18-24 inches
The Otravati (Ap. "Poison"; pi. "Otrovativi) is small snake
found in western Harad. Rarely
exceeding two feet in length, it
has a murky grey coloring and is
easy to overlook. It is, however,
not an animal to take lightly.
The Otravati's narrow head
opens to reveal a surprisingly
large mouth full of tiny needlelike teeth. Each tooth is an injector that delivers a dose of the
snake's poison on any successful bite (whenever a critical is
scored on the attack table).
Locals consider amputation to
be the only effective remedy
when confronted by the snake's
potent (25th lvl) venom. A
nerve poison, it attacks through
the bloodstream and the nervous
system simultaneously. The
venom is lethal within one hour.
Only immediate removal of the
bitten member will serve as a
cure. It is no wonder that the
snake bears a name which translates as "poison."
PETLAVI: hwsa-FMZ,CDJ,IRX-4; 26-32 feet
The Petla (pi. "Petlavi"), or "Forest-strangler," of southwestern
Endor is commonly found in the scattered woodlands of Far Harad
(particularly in the Forest of Tears). It haunts the oases between
Umbar and Drel, lurking in the branches and pools that the
Haradrim prize so dearly. One of Middle-earth's most fearsome
reptiles, the Petla is an able hunter who has perfected the arts of
camouflage and ambush. It is mottled brown in color and blends
perfectly with woodland hues. Dropping from above or entangling
its prey in water, the snake attacks by using its powerful jaws to
gain a grip and then coils its length around its hapless victim.
Petlavi reaches lengths exceeding thirty feet and at least one
specimen measured forty-five feet in length. Their thickest portions are over a foot wide, and they have been known to swallow
a whole goat (using their distended jaws).

Animal Glossary: Rávatsar
Petlavi like to bite; however their principal weapon is their
coiling, constricting body. Whenever they take hold of prey
(typically after a "B" critical strike result), the victim has l i t t l e
hope of survival. From that point on, the enormously powerful
body will move to coil itself around the target's body. This process
takes one to ten rounds. It is an extremely hard (-30) maneuver
(add ST bonus) to break out of a Petla's grasp and, once the beast
perfects its grip, the victim will perish due to suffocation in three
to thirty minutes.
The tables are turned when the Petla confronts a group, as its
methods of attack leave it relatively defenseless if other foes are
involved. For this reason, the snake will not often stand and fight
when confronted by more than one enemy.

ROCK VIPERS: wmskt-A,DCH,LR-6; 12-18 inches
An inconspicuous little creature, the Rock Viper would not be
worth mentioning, save that those climbing cliffs and mountains in
Endor would be well-advised to watch where they place their
hands or their bare feet (Hobbits, especially), for this snakeling is
fond of sunbathing on rocky ledges. Their grey skin is speckled
with brown and black spots, enabling the serpent to blend in with
rock surfaces. (The creature is also called the Leopard Viper.)
Although it is small, the Rock Viper's bite is quite deadly (20th
lvl). There has never been a proven case of anyone surviving such
a bite without some sort of medical treatment, either magical or
herbal. The victim of such a bite first suffers swelling, massive
bruising, and discoloration around the wound. Then, w i t h i n 60
seconds after being bitten, his heart will begin to palpitate, his
breathing will become irregular, his endocrine system w i l l fail, and
he will die of total system shock within 6-10 minutes.

23
SHAKING ASPS: kt-F,CDH,L-5; 15-24 inches
This small, gray snake has a distinctive ruff of loose scales that
give off a faint, odd rattling sound when the serpent is startled or
about to strike. Its potent venom (level 8) causes massive internal
hemorrhage, causing tremendous (24-60 hits) shock and often
(with 26+ RR failure) death. The Shaking Asp is a native of
Rhudaur, the region in eastern Eriador between the Mitheithel
(Hoarwell) and Bruinen (Loudwater) Rivers.
SLOW-FANGS: hw-FM,DJ,L-4; 8-10 feet
The Slow-fang is one of the most dangerous and dominant
creatures in the rain forests of southern Endor. Large (9' long) and
exceptionally strong, it leaves in trees and hunts large mammals
and smaller reptiles. Its body coloration varies with the surface
they happen to cross, although it is usually brownish and has
mottled green stripes. They have friction pads on their feet,
specialized scales that enable them to stick to vertical surfaces for
indefinite periods. The Slow-fangs are naturally agile tree-climbers. This feature, however, impairs their movement on the jungle
floor, and they are awkward runners; thus their name. Still, they
can be quite deadly. Endowed with a strong, 6' long prehensile
tongue that acts like a whip or bola, they can strike a foe quickly.
Then they bite the immobilized victim with a pair of 7" fangs,
injecting a mild (2nd lvl) muscle poison. This venom disables the
prey long enough for the Slow-fang to slowly discard any inedible
trappings (e.g., clothing) before swallowing the meal in one long
gulp.
TRUSAVI: hw-FM,J,L-4;2-3 inches
An arboreal creature, the Trusa (P. "Leaf Frog"; pl. "Trusavi")
is adapted for gliding from tree to tree. It has a broad head, a long
slim body, and elongated limbs with webbed feet. Flaps of skin
fringe the forelimbs and heels, permitting the creature to extend its
body and create a bizarre but effective set of "wings." This bright
red and blue frog grows no larger than about 3 inches in length, but
they are among the deadliest animals in the humid woodlands of
southeastern Middle-earth. If touched, the spines on the back of
the Trusa will inject a strong (lvl 4) poison which acts in 1-10 rds.
A victim who fails his RR by 21 or more dies, while one who fails
by 11-20 becomes blind and falls into a coma. A RR failure of 0110 leaves the victim blind in 1-2 eyes.
U M A K A V I : h-FM,J,L-7; 3-4 inches

SEA CROCODILES: hnwmk-OS-7; 18-27 ft
Uncommon but well-feared, the huge Sea Crocodiles resemble
Fell Beasts without wings. They are gracile, dark blue, and have
black stripes running down the backs of their horny backs. Many
chroniclers believe they are related to Water Drakes, for Sea
Crocodiles have enlongated conical grasping teeth in the forward
part of their snouts that extend well outside their mouths. All other
members of the Crocodile family have shorter fangs that fit into
notches or pits in their upper jaw.
Like sea monsters, Sea Crocodiles are prone to attack smaller
ships, seeking to puncture hulls with their mighty jaws, then
waiting for the ship to founder. Nesting in secluded bays or in
coastal caves, they also present a danger on land as well.

A small tree frog from the rainforests of the Mûmakan in the
south of Middle-earth, the Umak (pl. "Umakavi") is notable for the
potent contact poison exuded by its colorful skin. Bright lime
green and streaked with yellow and orange, the Umak Tree Frog is
noticeable, but it is so rare that it is still nearly impossible to spot.
The bright coloring warns away animal and bird predators who
would be poisoned upon grabbing the frog in their beaks or mouths,
but merely makes things easier for clever human or Elf hunters
who wish to extract the poison and who come armed with nets on
long handles. The poison is tenth level in contact with skin;
unlucky individuals are killed instantly (upon failing a RR), while
the more fortunate are plunged into a coma until awakened by
some form of anitdote.

24

Animal Glossary: Locations of Rávatsar

Animal Glossary: Rávatsar & Lassanakûni
ZAMKAVI: ans-BVZ,P-5; 6-7 feet
The Zamka (pl. "Zamkavi") is common to the dry hills of
western Harad. Its name translates as "snare," and is derived from
this snake's method of attack. The Zamka whips its tail out like a
lash and coils about a limb or appendage. The snake's long (7)
body is lined with small barbs along each side. The barbs are
coated with a poisonous secretion which enters through the skin of
its victim. This (7th lvl) muscle poison essentially paralyzes the
prey (duration = 20 minutes per ten points of RR failure). When
its venom takes effect — in forty-five seconds — the serpent will
move to constrict its prey. Once the victim is dead, the Zamka
remains with the corpse until time and weather has softened i t .
Then the snake begins its feast. Other animals of the region are
aware of the nature of the Zamka and will steer well clear of any
kill it guards, for the snake will not hesitate to add another body to
its larder, should any be foolish enough to approach.
NOTE: For hit determination, the Entangle Table should
be used with any critical indicating a poisoning. The Zamka
will aim at areas of bare skin, but will not actually attempt
to constrict a victim that is moving, and it will continue its
attacks until movement ceases, even if a hit has already been
made. Successive RR failures will give cumulative effects.
ZURKUVI: wmsk-BFZ,P-3;8-l2

25
Almost all Salqakûni are herd animals, or Ûnûvear (Q. "Abundant Creatures"). Of these, the majority are Potûni (sing. "Potûn"),
the "Hoofed Creatures." Horses, asses, camels, and other beasts
commonly used for riding do not fall into this category, however
(see 5.6), since they hold a special place in nature.
ASTABANHÉLI: wmskt-F,P-4; 4.5-6.5 ft
The Astabanhe or Giant Pronghorn is an antelope-like creature
found mainly in the Pinnath Ceren (S. "Red Fells") and the
Girithlin highlands of Eriador. They stand about 4' tall, and are dull
yellow in color. While renowned for their loud white rump, their
short black horns give the Astabanhéli their name.
Pronghorns travel in small herds (10-100) and are inquisitive,
but they are quick to flee. Movements of their white tail fur signal
other Astanbanhéli when there is danger or when they have taken
to flight. They can travel at speeds of up to forty miles per hour and
can swim quite well.

inches

The Zurku (Ap. "Trail lizard"; pl. "Zurkuvi") is found throughout Harad, particularly in the south. It is related to the Gorbet of
northwestern Endor. (Gorbets are especially well known in
Dunland.) A dull yellow color with black and red stripes on its
head and neck, the Zurku is a colorful creature. (Gorbets only
differ in that they have black and blue speckles.) It has a bright
orange, arrow-shaped patch on its back.
The Zurku typically grows to a length of 12" and can be found
in the summer months. The lizard has no natural enemies because
it tastes terrible and secretes a mild nerve toxin from its skin. The
poison is absorbed through the skin and paralyzes victims for a
period of 10-20 minutes. Of course, this venom only numbs the
limbs of larger attackers for awhile, but for most animals it is an
effective deterrent.
What is notable about this relatively harmless lizard is its
reputation as a pathfinder. It is believed by most Haradrim that if
they are lost and follow a Zurku, it will lead them to a trail or road.
(This legend is shared by the Dunlendings and appears to have
originated among the ancient Southrons during the early Second
Age.) There may be some truth to this belief, since the Zurku
apparently understands that, where there are trails there are beasts
(and beast-droppings), and where there are beasts there are flies.

AURYCH: mskt-BF,P,IX -8 ;7.5-9.5 ft
The Auroch (pl. "Aurych") is a domesticated breed of the wild
cattle or Kine that roam Rhovanion (Wilderland). They vary in
color, but most have medium length, dark brown fur on their
bodies, and shorter, whiter fur on their legs and foreheads. Males
have larger, curving, conical horns.
Like all Kine, Aurych migrate with the seasons and tend to
wander wide areas whenever breeding.
CARU:

mktc-BF,CDHPT-7;5-7.5ft

The Caru (Du. "Elk") is a large brown Deer commonly found in
northern Eriador, but ranging throughout the cooler parts of
northwestern Middle-earth. It is the only Deer species, save the
Losrandir, in which both the males and females sport antlers.
Caru travel in huge herds of one to twenty thousand and range
over vast areas of open country or broken woodlands. Feeding on
grass and other tundra plants in the summer, some roam well into
the Far North.
CULCARNIX: wmskt-BF,P-5;2-3ft

5.5 LASSANAKÛNI (LEAF-EATERS)
Endor's herbivores feed directly on Olvar and constitute a link
between the two orders of creation. Most are known as Lassanakûni, or "Leaf-eaters" (sing. "Lassanakûn"). These creatures
are distinguished from other herbivorous beasts because they
never eat anything other than vegetation and, most importantly,
because they are outwardly passive. Oromë and Yavanna share an
interest in them, although the Huntsman's Maia servant Yantolindo (Q. "Yoke-bearer") is closest to their thoughts.
The largest subgrouping of Lassanakûni is undoubtedly the
Salqanakûni, the beasts that eat grass. Notable for their elongated
skulls, they have huge cheek teeth. These, like the rest of their
teeth, are adapted for grass-chopping and grinding. Their incisors
are chisel-shaped, while their large premolars and molars have
convoluted surfaces.

This large, ground-dwelling rodent is found on the Talath
Harroch, the plain south of Mirkwood. They are reported to be
totally harmless, an opinion which owes much to the lack of
farmsteads in the Talath Harroch. Culcamix can devastate a farm
field. Nevertheless, they are totally unaggressive toward other
living beings.
Tailless and blunt-nosed, Culcarnix live in burrows beneath the
earth, and can occasionally be seen standing on the mounds of earth
by the entrances to their burrows, sniffing the air for any scent of
approaching enemies. They have thick, red-brown fur that has at
various times been much in demand by furriers. The Wainriders,
for instance, raised them in great numbers for their hides. Thus,
they have become scarce in areas where there is widespread
settlement.

Animal Glossary: Locations of Lassanakûni

Animal Glossary: Lassanakûni
CUNARA:

wmkt-F,P-8;2-3ft

27

The most common rodent in Cardolan, the Cunaura (Du.
"Gophers") of Eriador resemble big stout Rats and live mainly on
grass roots. On the plains they are a major nuisance because they
live in large colonies of interlocking burrows. Their holes rise up
about a foot from ground level but their tunnels run very close to
the surface and cannot be easily detected by Sheep, Horses, or Men
(leading to many broken legs).

unquenchable desire to be scratched on the head, between their
long, dangerous horns.
It is rumored by various denizens of the Talath Harroch region
(particularly those with small, naive children) that if one should do
one of these hoofed hedonists the favor of scratching it in the
proper spot, it will become ever loyal to the person who scratches
it. This tale has caused numerous injuries to youngsters seeking an
unusual pet.

DAPPLED DEER: mkt-L,DP-7; 4.5-6.5 ft

GORAL: wmkt-F,PH-5; 4.5-6.5ft

Akin to the Roe Deer (Fiara) of Eriador, the Dappled Deer is
small, hardy, and pugnacious creature. Only the stags fight, but
they are exceptionally skiddish and aggressive, especially in
Spring. They usually employ their tough horns, which can effectively penetrate mail.
Nocturnal creatures. Dappled
Deer browse for food at night.
They feed on shrubs and broadleafed trees. During breeding season, males mark their territory by
scratching the bark off trees.
NOTE: The Dúnadan Rangers
have frequently used this trait
to their advantage by disguising their own trail markings as
Deer scratches. Only the Rangers understand the subtle differences.

Goral are a wild, golden bighorn Sheep found exclusively in the
Downs of Eriador. They have long, curving, whitish horns.
Solitary and intractable, they arc unique among Sheep. Goral only
gather during mating season, when small groups of males join and
then seek out the females.
Ranked by the size of their
horns, the males instinctively
know their place, so there is
little fighting during these brief
unions. After mating, the females travel as a herd with the
young for a couple of months
and then scatter.
Goral have been very profitably interbred with domestic
Sheep, producing excellent varieties of wool-bearing species
(Q. "Toa" = "Wool").

FIARA: wmkt-FDP-6; 3.5-4.5 ft
Thriving on the scant grasses of
south-central Eriador, the Fiara is
the most common wild herbivore
in Cardolan and Minhiriath. They
keep to small groups of four or five
does and a buck and range all over
the region.
Extremely timid,
though, they shy away from settled
areas and seem much rarer than
their real numbers would dictate.
It is fortunate that these small
beasts are prolific, for no creature
in northwestern Endor is hunted as
often as the Fiara. Eriadoran hunters have long relied on the Fiara as
a food staple, and cooks from Bree
to Tharbad create dozens of dishes using this tasty Deer meat.
FlNTÓNARKI: wmskt-BF,P-5; 3-4 ft
The Fintónarki, or Wild Goats, are odd beasts found on the
plains south of Mirkwood. They have several characteristics that
set them apart from the other Goats of Middle-earth. For one thing,
they are sometimes found in mixed herds with the Wild Horses of
the area, an arrangement found nowhere else. Second, they are almost untamable, although it is reported that Elves may have some
success at this task (although Elves are generally uninterested in
animal husbandry). Third, they are immune to all naturally
occurring ingestible poisons and hence can live on almost anything
that contains nourishment. Finally, these strange creatures have an

KINE OF ARAW: wmsktF,HP-4; 10-12 ft
The Kine of Araw are the
largest of Middle-earth's bovids, that is creatures with split,
even-toed, hoofs. It is believed
that these large, white cattle are
the gift of the Vala Oromë
(Araw). This is quite possibly
true. The beasts are found on
the shores of the Sea of Rhûn
and on the Plain of Talath Harroch, east and south of Mirkwood.
As far as anyone can tell, the
Easterling tribes are the only
people to have domesticated
these creatures and used them as draft beasts, since the Rhovanion
Northmen revered the Kine and used them only for breeding other
cattle. Easterlings, on the other hand, employed Kine to pull the
Great Wains of their chiefs. During the brief existence of the Wainrider Kingdom in Wilderland (T.A. 1854-99), dozens of these
magnificent beasts were pressed into service, and many perished
in the raiding and wars that accompanied the Wain-easterlings' occupation.
Many people of central Middle-earth value the long gray horns
of these cattle, both to use as trumpets and drinking horns and to
cut into sections for superb compound bows. A few superstitious
folk use the ground horn as an ingredient for healing potions, but
no proof has ever been found that this substance is of any real value
in healing.

,

Animal Glossary: Lassanakûni & Riding and Draft Animals

28
LOSRANDÍR:

mktc-BF,CDHPT-7;5-7.5ft

The Losrandir is a hardy, gregarious Deer with a long, low
profile and large antlers. They come in many colors — everything
from white to jet black — but most are grey or silver. Unlike those
of other Deer, the low forward tine of its antlers is branched. Both
males and females bear antlers, although those of the female are
usually smaller.
Female Losrandír (aka "Lesraindír") move in large herds while
males travel in small groups or, in some cases, alone. Wolves and
Bears prey on weaker individuals, but the Losrandír's greatest
natural enemy is undoubtedly Man. The Lossoth of northwestern
Middle-earth and the Urd of the northeast hunt the graceful
creature for its fur, meat, and utility as a beast of burden.
NlMFIARA:

There have been attempts to tame the friendly beasts, but
Stetanavi that are taken into captivity invariably die shortly thereafter, an occurrence that is usually blamed on loneliness for their
own kind. It is possible, however, to overcome this problem
through the use of a Familiar spell, though having such a puckish
creature as a familiar would certainly have its drawbacks.
WILD GOATS: wmskt-ABFMZ,PT-6; 3-4ft
Essentially descendants of various escaped domestic varieties,
the Wild Goats have dirty, shaggy coats and short, black horns.
They range all over Middle-earth. Their small, sharp hooves make
them agile climbers, and they can swim remarkably well; however,
they restrict the beasts' movements in the boglands, where wide
feet provide stability in the muck.

mktc-BF,CDH,E-3:7-9ft

Larger and rarer than Elk, the Nimfiara (S./Du. "White Hart") is
the strongest and most imposing breed of Deer found in northwestern Middle-earth. Reputedly mystical creatures, they range in the
ancient woodlands of Rhovanion, Gondor, Calenardhon, and
Eriador. They are found deep within the Old Forest and the Dark
Wood, and a few have been spotted in Fangorn.
The Nimfiara's lustrous silver pelt is prized for fine garments,
so it is hunted and trapped by woodsmen. Worse, its horns are said
to produce a potion which retards aging. Thus, the beast's value
threatens its survival and, aside from the inaccessibility of their
habitat, the Nimfiara has few defenses against extinction. They
are, however, very wily, and they will put up a good fight when
cornered.

The largest and most powerful of Endor's Sheep, the Rútorasse
(Q. "Eastern Woolhoms"; pl. "Rútorassi") is a stout, black and
silver beast that stands about 4-5 feet at the shoulder. It is aptly
named, for its silvery head fur grows up the sides of its curved
horns. These two forward- facing weapons can be lethal, however,
and the Woolhorn is quick to employ them for defense. Thus, this
beast is difficult to domesticate.
Native to the lands of Dalpygis, Chey , and the Kargagis Ahar in
central Middle-earth, Woolhorns roam at night in small, segregated herds. Males run apart from the females except during the
mating season, which lasts from late summer until early fall. When
united, the mixed herd is relatively stationary for about a month.
The first half of this period is devoted to courting rituals, which
include brutal duels between males seeking dominance (and their
choice of mates).
STETANAVI: wmk-BFM,PD-7; 6-7 ft
In Apysaic, Stetan means "mischievous." It applies perfectly to
this otter-like creature. The beast's body is as large as a big dog,
and it is as friendly and playful as the most lively of puppies. It has
very short legs, though, so no one would mistake it for a hound.
The Stetan's name was earned from Haradrim who journeyed
into the wood, worked a long day gathering herbs, then saw their
sacks and parcels playfully torn apart just before they returned
home. Only their overpowering air of pure innocence keeps
Stetanavi from being killed on sight by most men who glean their
living from the wood. As it is, they are usually viewed as a sign of
long-term good luck even if they are a short-term nuisance.

5.6 RIDING AND DRAFT ANIMALS
Considered gifts of the Vala Oromë, riding and draft animals are
collectively known as Oromildar (Q. "Friends of Oromë) or
Annaroromo (Q. "Oromë's Gifts"). They include a wide variety of
domesticated creatures, most of whom were originally native to
the wide lands of central Middle-earth.
ANDAMUNDAR: hnwms-FM,CDP,IX-2; 18-22 feet long, 10-13
feet at shoulder
The Andamunda (Q. "Elephant"; pl. "Andamundar"; lit. "Longsnouted") is the smaller and more numerous cousin of the famous
Mûmak (see below). Like all of its cousins, it has thick, pillarlike
legs and flat, padded feet. Its loose skin and large ears (which flap)
provide the Andamunda with excellent heat regulation, enabling it
to adapt to a variety of ecosystems. The creature's most notable
feature, however, is undoubtedely its trunk: an enlongated nose
and upper lip that serves as both a sensory organ and as a prehensile
grasping tool. An Andamunda uses its trunk to smell, gather food,
drink, and as a weapon in combat.
Andamundar also have a pair of long tusks that they use in
melees, but these giant teeth primarily serve as digging tools.
Since Andamundar subsist on roots, shoots, twigs, fruit, leaves,
and other edible vegetation, the tusks act as picks. A typical
Andamunda eats about 400 pounds of food each day, cutting with
the tusks, grasping with its trunk, and placing the food in its mouth.
Aside from one or two rest periods at night and a midday break, the
great beast is always active, roaming about with a swinging gait in
a constant search for security and food. This continual plodding,
though, belies the Andamunda's strength as a swift, agile runner.
If aroused, it can run down and gore or bash a relatively quick foe.
Unlike the Mûmak, the Andamunda has a slightly humped back
and one (as opposed to two or three) fingerlike extension at the base
of its trunk. It also has a gland at the side of its head that enables
it to secrete, and divest itself of, scented waste. (This process
usually occurs during the beast's midday repose.) Like Mûmakil
female Andamundar travel in herds led by an elder matriarch. Each
female bears but one offspring at a time (after 21 months gestation!
and raises her calf for twenty-four to thirty months.
Common to the Shay lands, Jojojopo, and the regions around the
Bay of Ormal in southern Middle-earth, Andamundar are dome
ticated by a variety of cultures. They are used less frequently that
the Mûmakil as riding animals, but they arc much easier to tame

Animal Glossary: Locations of Riding and Draft Animals
29

Animal Glossary: Riding and Draft Animal

30
DEVEVI:

nas-BFZ,HP,INX-8;7-8ft

The Devevi (Ap. "Camels"; sing. "Deve") of southern and
central Endor are hardy animals who store water in their stomach
linings and can go for long periods without drinking. Their humps
absorb heat and metabolize fat to provide energy and water, while
their wide foot pads enable them to w a l k on soft, sandy soil. With
a complex, three-chambered stomach that permits digestion of
virtually any vegetation, the Deve is ideally adapted lor life in the
desert.
A Deve has no need to sweat because of its refined temperature
regulation system. It can lose over a quarter of its body weight
without suffering and it can restore this weight in an orgy of
drinking lasting only ten minutes. A thirsty Deve can intake about
7-8 gallons of water in a minute.
There are two subgroups of Devevi: the runners and the workers.
The former are light, graceful mounts built for riding and speed.
The latter are thickly-built, slow-moving creatures capable of
bearing heavy loads. Although both varieties are easy to domesticate and extremely well-suited to their appointed purpose, all
Devevi are somewhat loud and filthy. They spit on the unwary and
are virtually impossible to keep clean.
The most prized of these creatures is the rare Deve Póa, the twohumped beast bred in and around the desert city of Tûll Póac
in Far Harad. A hardy Deve originally haling from the
Yellow Mountains of southern Endor, it is adapted for both
temperature extremes. It grows a shaggy coat whenever
the weather is cold, shedding its thick, wooly fur whenever
the climate is warmer. The Deve Póa of the hotter deserts
are virtually naked. They are more docile than other
Devevi, and much more comfortable to ride. Besides
having a natural saddle, Deve Póa move with a smooth,
rolling gait—the result of being able to lift both legs on one
side at a time.
ELVEN HORSES: wmk-FM,CDP,E-2; 7-8 ft
The Horses of the Elves, like the Mearas (see below), are
directly descended from Nahar, the steed of Oromë, Huntsman of the Valar. Nahar is, of course, immortal; however,
his descendants are not, but Elvish Horses nevertheless live
to great age (100 years is not unusual). These Horses differ
in many subtle but important ways from their lesser
kindred.
First, they rarely have white markings, except for an
occasional white "star" on the forehead. Large white
patches (of the kind that lead Horses to be called "painted,"
"piebald," or "skewbald") are never seen. However, all
other colors to be found in lesser Horses are also found in
Elven Horses, except that white and silvery dappled gray
are more common among this breed. Second, these Horses
prefer to live in wooded areas, as the Elves do themselves,
rather than the plains that are home to most Horses. Third,
Elven Horses are more intelligent than most Horses. There
is no need to rise them with a bit or bridle, for they are
empathetic and perceptive enough to receive directions
from their riders without these crude devices. Although an
Elven Horse might consent to wear a saddle to aid an ailing
or disabled rider, most Elves do without. Finally, Elven
Horses stand staunchly in the face of dangers that would
terrify most Horses. They are brave even in the face of
supernatural terrors such as Trolls and (he Undead.

Nahar, Steed of Oromë. This great white spirit in the shape of a
Horse can sense Evil from leagues off. His hooves are of a silver
harder than any steel and strike at Evil foes like the hammers of
Aulë. Although he can speak, he rarely chooses to do so. Some
say that he sometimes visits mortal mares at night and leaves
them with foal. Although this may be mere superstition, no one
argues that he was the forefather of the Mearas and the Horse of
the Elves (see above). Nahar's neigh is like the sound of a
mighty trumpet, like his master Oromë's great Horn, and like
the sound of that Horn, his voice inspires terror in all Evil beings
and courage in those who are Good.
Nimros, Steed of Glorfindel. A lightly built, swift white Horse
belonging to the High Elf Glorfindel, this lovely animal carried
Frodo, the Ring-bearer, away from the Nazgûl that pursued him
at the Ford of Bruinen near the end of the Third Age. For sheer
distances, Nimros rivals any Horse as the fastest steed in
Middle-earth.
Rochallor, Steed of Fingolfin. This noble beast bore his master
to the very gates of Angband for the duel with Morgoth that was
Fingolfin's doom. The exact appearance of Rochallor is unrecorded, but some, pointing to the last element of his name, "lor.
have guessed that he was a golden chestnut or perhaps even
true golden color (a palomino).

Animal Glossary: Riding and Draft Animals
HORSES OF MORDOR: nas-BF,HP-8;8-9ft.
The forces of Evil, most notably the corrupted Maia Sauron,
have bent Horses to their nefarious purposes, just as they have
other forms of life. Sauron originally had his Nazgûl mounted on
black Horses stolen as foals and thus accustomed to evil creatures
and surroundings at an early age. These beasts were also fortified
somewhat by spells and potions to make them swift, tireless, and
unafraid of things that would terrify a normal steed. Sauron was
unable to breed a strain of Horses shaped to his w i l l .
By the end of the Third Age, however, the Dark Lord had
succeeded in reshaping some of the stolen foals. These unfortunate
creatures were enlarged and strengthened, given carnivorous
foreteeth, fiery, night-sighted eyes, and steaming, smoking breath.
Their faces became skull-like, and their hooves were like polished
iron. One of these twisted creatures was the mount of the Mouth
of Sauron, Lieutenant of the Tower of Barad-dûr.
NOTE: This creature can be characterized as a minister.
See Section 6.0 for more information regarding Evil Horses.
The Mount of the Mouth of Sauron. This beast was the first (and
perhaps the last) of its kind to be seen by the Free Peoples. Its
master rode it to the parley with the Forces of the West at the
Black Gate during the War of the Ring. Exceedingly large and
powerful, it could run almost as fast as a Meara and enjoyed
tremendous stamina. Its sharp-edged hooves and saw-like jaws
enabled it to penetrate a foe's armor in a melee. The beast's
greatest weapon, though, was undoubtedly its foul steam, which
was akin to the Nazgûls infamous Black Breath. With a range
of 30 feet, the Horse could breathe on any target within a 5 foot
radius. Targets failing their RR by 01-50 fell into despair for 120 rounds and were stunned and unable to parry their foes.
Those failing their RR by 51 -75 fell into unbreakable despair for
1-100 rounds, while those failing their RR by 76+ fell into a
feverish sleep for 1-20 hours.

31
Felaróf, Ancestor of the Mearas. Felaróf was captured as a colt
by Leód of the Éothéod, Lord and Horsemaster. When the colt
had grown to what Leód thought was adult stature (as a Meara,
the Horse actually had some growing left to do), he killed his
master when Leód attempted to mount him. Leód's son Eorl
vowed vengeance on the Horse and pursued him. When he at
last saw his father's killer, instead of shooting the creature with
a bow, he called out to him, calling him "Mansbane" and telling
him to come forward and receive a new name. This the Horse
did, and apparently made submission to Eorl as wergild (payment for a killing). Thus did Mansbane become Felaróf, founder
of the breed of Mearas.
Shadowfax, Gandalfs Steed. This noble creature was the chief
of the Mearas of Rohan at the time of King Théoden. At one
time, Gandalf was attempting to rouse Théoden to an awareness
of his danger from both Sauron and (possibly) from Saruman,
but Théoden at that time still believed the evil councils of Gríma
Wormtongue and hence did not heed Gandalf's words. He
angrily bade the wizard to take any Horse he wished if he would
leave as soon as possible. Greater still was the king's anger
when he realized which Horse Gandalf had taken. Shadowfax
served Gandalf well throughout the War of the Ring, withstanding all of the terrors of Mordor that they faced together and
outrunning even the Fell Beasts, who were winged.
Snowmane, Steed of King Théoden. A noble white stallion, like
his ancestor Felaróf, Snowmane bore Théoden bravely through
several battles of the War of the Ring, before the two of them
died in the Battle of the Pellenor Fields. Snowmane fell to a
poisoned dart and crushed his master beneath his great weight.
Snowmane was later buried in the Pellenor Fields, and a great
mound was raised over him as a memorial, with a white stone
carved with the legend "Faithful Servant, yet master's bane;
Lightfoot's foal, swift Snowmane." It was said afterward that
the grass always grew noticeably green and thick on the mound,
which became known as Snowmane's Howe.

LOSANDAMUNDAR: ktcf-FM,CD,IX-2; 18-22ft
The rare white, long-haired Losandamunda (Q. "Snow Elephant") of the Far North is related to the Andamunda of southern
Endor (see above). These furry behemoths, though, are rarely
domesticated. Instead, they are worshipped (notably by the Uax,
but also by the Myri and Angela tribes) or hunted (notably by the
eastern Lossoth and Lotan).
MARSH PONIES: m s k t - F M , H P - 6 ; 5 - 6 ft
Also called the Perroch-i-Lin, the Marsh Pony is a short, sturdy
beast with relatively wide hooves and powerful lungs. Most are
grey, and all have a long, silky mane.
MEARAS: mskt-FM,HP-6; 7-8ft
These Horses are among the most noble of the Endorian beasts.
They were unknown as a breed before ca. T.A. 2545, the approximate date that the first breeding herd was f u l l y established in
Rohan by Eorl the Young. However, individual Mearas were to be
found in Middle-earth before that date. They are commonly (and
correctly) believed to be the descendants of Nahar, the Steed of
Oromë, as are the Elven Horses (see above). The progenitor of the
breed of Fearas in Rohan was Felaróf, who was white. Such was
his strength as an ancestor that most of his descendants are white
or dappled gray. All Mearas, regardless of their color, share
Felaróf's other characteristics. They understand human speech,
can be ridden without saddle or bridle (although they w i l l tolerate
such devices if needed), and live to a great age — eighty years is
not unusual.

MÛMAKIL (OLIPHAUNTS): hnwm-FLQ,HP-6; 12-15 ft
The huge, fearsome, and majestic Mûmak (W. "Oliphaunt"; P.
"Tembo"; pl. "Tembovi") is a close relative of the Andamunda
(Elephant) and is often referred to as the Gorsandamunda (Q.
"Giant Elephant"). It is the "lord" of Endor's southern wilds.
Growing up to t h i r t y feet in length and standing up to 17 feet in
height at the shoulder, they have few foes. Fortunately for their
rivals, though, Mûmakil are vegetarians. They rest in the midday
heat and occasionally relax at night, but most of the time they roam
in search of nutritious roots, leaves, shoots, twigs, and fruits. Using
their agile trunks and huge tusks, which grow as long as 7', they can
reach through narrow clefts and dig through the toughest soils.
These social beasts travel in herds and adapt well (albeit reluctantly) to domestication.
When aroused though, they can be deadly fighters. Both the
Ûsakani and the Mûmakani have long prized them as mounts for
war. Unlike lesser elephantine beasts, the Mûmak relish battle and
bloodshed. The Haradrim build great fighting towers to place on
the backs of these largest of domesticated beasts and decorate the
legs and tusks of the Mûmakil as well. A Mûmak fully arrayed for
battle is an awesome, glorious, and terrifying sight. The thick hides
of Mûmakil make them almost invulnerable to arrows, except for
their eyes, but when blinded in this fashion, they often run mad
with pain, trampling and destroying everything in their paths.

32
WILD HORSES: wmk-BFM,PD-7; 6 - 7 f t
The Wild Horse, or Horse of the Plains (S. "Rechelaid"), make
good mounts, although they are hard to break. Much used by
Easterlings, they are now herded in Calenardhon (Rohan). A few
may be found in the marshes, for they do not mind swimming.
ZÛRAFY: nas-BFZ,DHP,INX-4; 9-l4 ft
The Zûrafy (V. "Tallnecks"; sing. "Zûrafa") of Nûrad, northern
Chey, and the Talathrant Valley resemble stout giraffes with long,
spikelike horns. They are related to Deer and feed on the foliage,
fruit, and buds found in the upper part of trees or tall scrub. In
harsher locales, a Zûrafa will stoop to eat grasses, and herds of the
beasts have been known to devastate crops.
The Nûriags, Variags, and Chey use the Zûrafy as mounts, for
they are swift, fearless, and exceedingly fierce combatants. Because of their limited numbers and the difficulty in capturing and
domesticating them, though, only small numbers of the beasts have
been employed outside the circles of royalty.
Most Zûrafy have a whitish or light tan coat and brown and white
striped legs. Their horns are covered with short, white hair which
they never shed. The rare, omnivorous, nocturnal Variag Zûrafa
is jet black.

Animal Glossary: Riding and Draft Animals & Apsanakûni
BLACK MINKS: ktc-FM,CD-6;3-4ft
Cunning, carnivorous mammals reaching up to 4' in length
Black Minks are dangerous freshwater predators. Much larger
than their kin, they are strong swimmers in spite of their weight
which is fifty to eighty pounds. (Males are larger than female
Black Mink are most common in the Wetwang (Nindalf), near
Ithilien, but they can occasionally be found in other areas in north
central Middle-earth, always near water (marshes, stream or river
banks, or the shore of freshwater lakes).
Black Minks are voracious and seem to possess a surprising
degree of brutal intelligence. They have been known, for example
to wait for a young, tender creature of some sort to stray far from
its mother before attacking. They usually hunt alone, but in the
early spring they come together in groups of 7-12 to choose mates
for the year. At this time they will attack anything that crosses the
path. They cannot be driven off when they are in this state, on
killed, and they will fight until literally torn apart.
If an intact pelt is somehow obtained by such subtle methods
poison or drowning (difficult, as they can hold their breath for up
to ten minutes), it is worth a great deal of money (anywhere from
six to fifteen gold pieces, depending upon the market), for the fur
of the Black Mink is fabulously thick and glossy, as well as heir
entirely waterproof.
BLUE BEARS: mkt-AFM,CD,ELX-4; 6-8ft

5.7 APSANAKÛNI (MEAT-EATERS)
The Apsanakûni (Q. "Meat-eaters"; sing. "Apsanakûn") are
carnivorous mammals. Save the Children of Iluvatar, they are the
last link in the Chain of Life. They are the smartest and cruelest of
animals — and the most likely to succumb to the offerings of Evil.
BLACK BEARS: nwmktc-AFM,CD,L-7; 5-6 ft
A strongly-built but compact creature, the Black Bear (Q.
"Meglivorn"; pl. "Meglivorni") is common throughout northern
Endor. They are nocturnal hunters who feed on insects, rodents,
fish, small mammals, and carion, supplementing this diet with
fruit, berries, nuts, roots, and honey (Q. "Lissen"). During the
autumn. Black Bears gorge on food so that they can be properly
sustained during their long winter sleep (hibernation). They have
a superb sense of smell, but their hearing and eyesight are merely
average by the standards of the Apsanakûni.
Black Bears are solitary animals. Mating pairs stay together
briefly only during the late summer mating season. After the litter
(of 1-4) appears in the midwinter, the female travels with the cubs.
The Eriadorans have an almost cultic obsession with hunting
Bears, for they believe a bear-kill to be the ultimate test of one's
prowess as a warrior. Both the Eriadoran Northmen and the
Lossoth to the north revere and fear Bears. The mystical Bear-cults
of both cultures exert a strong but subtle influence over their
societies. The Beijabar, or Beornings, inherited the Eriadoran
Northman tradition.

Blue Bears (Q. "Megliluini"; sing. "Megliluinë") are considered monsters by many of Endor's loremasters. Unusual creatures
they are found only on the southern slopes of the White Mountains
particularly in the Lamedon (Morthond Valley) region of Gondor.
Their bluish-gray fur, unswervingly predatory attitude, and innateability to sense other creatures set them apart from all other Bears.
NOTE: Treat Blue Bears as having an inherent and
constant Presence spell ability, enabling them to perceive
living beings up to 50 ft away.
Blue Bears are usually solitary, but they will occasionally hunt
in family groups. They do not fear others unless there is a larger
group involved. Often attacking without apparent provocation.
Megliluini hunt whenever they are hungry and have an opportunity
to kill. The frequency of their attacks is also explained by their
territorial habits. Blue Bears stake out territories that they defend
from each other and from other predators of similar size —
including Men and Elves.
BLUE OTTERS:

wmktc-FM,CDH-3;5-7ft

While similar to their more mundane brethren. Blue Otters are
larger and have flattened tails with sharp crests on each edge. They
generally travel in small groups during the day, feeding on fish
eggs, smaller aquatic mammals, and birds. Using tree roots as
structural supports, they reside in dens cut into larger, stabler
sandbars or riverbanks. Here they produce litters of only one or
two young each year. Their breeding pattern, coupled with their
large profile and valuable pelts, makes them ideal targets for
extinction. It is not surprising then, that Blue Otters are endangered. In many areas of northwestern Endor (notably Gondor).
however, they are protected by hunting bans.

Animal Glossary: Apsanakûni
CAVE BEARS:
mktc-AFM,CD,ELX-3;8-9ft
Cave Bears (Q. "Meglirondor"; sing. "Meglirondo") are huge
beasts that weigh up to fourteen hundred pounds. They have
rough, black fur, accented with brown stripes on the paws, ears,
and faces. Their paws can snap a neck as easily as a dry branch, and
their long claws can rip through light metal or any leather armor as
easily as through linen. Fortunately, they are retiring creatures
who like to eat tubers, roots and berries almost as much as they like
fish and small game. Only rarely do Men or Dwarves get the
opportunity to experience the blows of the Cave Bear.
Monogamous and family-minded, Cave Bears frequently travel
in small packs. Males travel alone, but the females prefer company
and will not leave their cubs until they are grown.
CHETMÍG: ktc-AF,CDHP,ILR-2; 9 ft (with tail)
The Chatmoig (pl. "Chetmíg") is a huge, rare, gray cat with f a i n t
tabby markings that enable it to hide with a degree of skill
surprising in so large a beast. A nocturnal predator, it has huge
forequarters and great (5-7 inch) fangs. Its body tapers from the
shoulders to strong but compact hindquarters. Using its long t a i l ,
the Chatmoig can balance itself when leaping, which it does
prodigiously: up to 150 ft horizontally and 40 ft vertically. The Cat
can be found (when it can be found at all) in northern h i l l s and
mountains.

33
DEATH SHREWS: kt-UV, L-7; 2-3 inches
Death Shrews are mild-looking little creatures with soft white
fur and an even softer, blue-gray underbelly. One would hardly
think that such a harmless looking little beast would deserve such
a foul name, but the little Death Shrew carries a grim disease, called
the Blue Hand. Victims who contract the disease develop a bluish
cast to the skin, large boils on their hands, feet and under their eyes,
and begin to bleed from the nose and ears. Sufferers often become
crippled, and many kill themselves.
The Shrews, of course, are merely carriers, or they would have
died out long ago. Even if they did not carry this disease, they
would still be considered suprisingly unpleasant creatures, for they
secrete a foul-smelling spray to protect themselves from large
predators.
Superb climbers, Death Shrews can avoid most encounters;
however, even when cornered they are formidable. The vicious
beasts have voracious appetites and will bite at exposed skin,
regardless of the size of the creature to which it belongs. They also
have spines strong enough to support the weight of a Man.
DIRE WOLVES: ktc-AFM,CDHPT,INR-5; 5-6ft
In most ways, the Dire Wolf (S. "Gothraug"; Q. "Narmosse"; pl.
"Narmossi") resembles its smaller cousin, the common Timber
Wolf. Found all over northern Middle-earth, they are intelligent,
social animals that live in family groups or small packs (2-11
and 10-60 members, respectively). Dire Wolves mate for
life, settle disputes among themselves with non-fatal duels,
and cooperate among themselves in hunting. However,
unlike common wolves, they have little or no fear of the Free
Peoples. They will hunt Men, Elves, or Dwarves like any
other prey.
Dire Wolves weigh up to one hundred and fifty pounds,
reach running speeds of up to thirty miles per hour, and leap
up to six feet in the air with little effort. Possessed of
tremendous nightvision, they are more nocturnal than their
smaller kin.
FISHING CATS: wmk-FM,DH-4; 2 - 3 f t
The Fishing Cat are most commonly found in the marshes
along the eastern shores of the Sea of Rhûn and in Wetwang
(Nindalf) in Ithilien. Unlike most felines, they have no
dislike of water and are well-adapted to aquatic life. They can
swim moderate distances and fish by flipping the fish out of
the water with deft strokes of their semi-webbed paws.
Fishing Cats supplement their diet with birds, shellfish, and
amphibians. Stealthy hunters, their mottled gray-brown fur
enables them to hide easily among the marshes and along the
river and lake shores that form their homes.
Their kittens can be domesticated, but like other large, wild
Cats, Fishing Cats never become very friendly and are
primarily one-person pets.
GÍCH: ktc-AFM,CDHP-7; 3-4 feet (including tail)
The Gaich (pl. "Gích") is a large Fox found throughout the
foothills of the Misty Mountains. It is the primary small
predator in Rhudaur. Its name means "changer," for the
Gaich is black in the summer and white in the winter.
Rhudaurans hold many superstitious views about its nature
and consider it sacrosanct when it is molting. For about two
weeks a year — when it sheds its old coat and its new fur is
growing in — the Gaich appears striped and is purportedly
immune to weaponry.

34
Gích eat primarily small mammals such as Rabbits, Mice, and
Squirrels, although they will also eat eggs, ripe fruit, and carrion.
Their furs are marketable, but not especially valuable.
GIANT MARTENS: mktc-FM,CD-3; 4.5-5.5 ft
A huge relative of the common weasel, the Giant Marten (S.
"Carlûmon"; pl. "Cerlymyn") is a fierce and irrational creature.
They are notoriously overactive and overexcitable, forcing them to
consume huge amounts of food in order to survive. Totally
carnivorous (although they will forage for nuts, fruits, and berries
when starving), they will eat anything that they can disable and kill,
even much larger creatures. Giant Martens have even been known
to slay Small Bears and Wild Boars.
Like other Martens, the acrobatic Carlûmon climbs extremely
well and generally makes its den in hollow trees. It has a keen nose
and fairly good vision.
CLIFF LIONS: haawmsk-AFM,CD,L-4; 4.5-6.5ft
The snowy-white Cliff Lion (Q. "Ralimba": pl. "Rálimbar"; P.
"Jabali Simba: pl. "Jabali Simbavi") lives in southwestern Middleearth. Their core territory stretches around the Bay of Orel, and
they are prevalent in the lower reaches of the Yellow Mountains
around the lake called Aeluin. Solitary creatures, they dart away
unless hungry, cornered, or surprised. They are hard to confront,
given their preference for virtually sheer terrain, remote rocky
clefts, and caves. Normally active in the morning and evening,
they roam the highlands and coastal fells in search of goats, sheep,
rodents, or carrion. Cliff Lions stalk their prey, and then strike w i t h
swift bites to the napes of their foes' necks.
DUNMEN'S DOGS: mktck-BFM,CDHP-7, 1.5-2.5 ft
Kept only by the tribal Dunlendings, the Dunmen's Dogs look
like a large, fat toy hound. These Dogs are sometimes used as
guards or for pack-hunting, of which they are marginally capable.
Most Dunmen's Dogs end up in the stewpot.
GLUTANI: mktc-AF,CH-5; Lowland 2-3 f t ; Highland 2.5-4 ft
The dreadful Glutan (pl. "Glutani") is found thoughout northwestern Endor, but the largest concentration of the creatures is
undoubtedly in western Minhiriath in Eriador. A Wolverine-like
creature, it is one of the most fearsome predators in Middle-earth.
It is a solitary, dark-furred beast shaped like a large badger. The
Glutan is unbelievably quick and fierce, and appears to be quite
insane. They have been known to attack large groups of armed men
without the slightest provocation, fighting to the death even if
escape is easily available.
There are two currently recognized varieties. The Lowland
variety is approximately two feet long on the average, with a
reddish brown coloration that fades to a lighter color in the winter.
They are very powerful for their size and will fight long after other
animals would have fled. These animals are quite temperamental
and will attack for no reason. A bounty has been placed on their
heads of 25 gp, but this reward is not one highly sought after. Those
that do hunt Glutani can sell the live creatures for more to
Dunlanders who use them in fights against Bears or Wolves.
The Highland or Mountain Glutan is no longer than its Lowland
relative, but it is somewhat bulkier. They are dark brown to black
in coloration, and stalk the high hills of Dunland unafraid of
anything. Similar in disposition to their Lowland relatives, they
are usually not sought after for bounty or capture because cages
that will hold them are hard to come by and Dunlanders are fond
of keeping their limbs.

Animal Glossary: Apsanakûni
GRASS
CATS:
wmskt-F,P-3;4-5ft
A handsome, long-legged hunter of the plains of Calenardhon,
the Grass Cat is now quite rare. Men have killed or domesticated
most of its prey and actively hunt the Cats for fear of losing Sheep,
Goats, or Kine.
A Grass Cat has a thick, short, buff-colored fur that easily
absorbs grass pollen in the summer months, giving it an eerie and
unnatural yellow-green coloration. The Cat hunts by leaping upon
the backs of its prey, digging its long claws into the victim's throat
and neck. Even if its victim is not killed by the severing of some
vital vein or nerve, it will run itself into a stupor or even to death.
There have been cases of Grass Cats killing Men in this same
manner.
When in heat, courting, or fighting. Grass Cats give off highpitched, raucous shrieks that are terrifying to hear, especially
during the long winter nights.
GREY WOLVES: mktc-F,CDHP,ILX-7;4-5ft
The Grey Wolf (S. "Draugwath"; pl. "Draugwaith"; Q. "Mistanarmo"; pl. "Mistanarmor"; aka "Sindanarmo") is a powerful,
muscular Dog with a thick coat of hair and a bushy tail. They range
all over Middle-earth. Varying in color from nearly black in
wanner locales to almost white in the North, they are exceptionally
adaptable.
Grey Wolves are exceptionally social animals who live in
family groups or packs that roam and hunt together. These packs
cooperate to run down their favorite prey: generally Deer and
Sheep in the warmer climes and Caru or Losrandír in cooler
regions. While typically interested only in larger herd animals,
they also feed on rodents, fish, and crustaceans and, in rare cases
(e.g., during hard winters or famines), they may attack lone
travellers, trappers, or hunters.
The wolfpack's hierarchy is organized and regulated in accord
with the Wolves' ritualized postures, gestures, and combat. Grey
Wolves, however, do not fight over mates except in extraordinary
circumstances. Pairs normally remain together for life.
HIGHLAND LYNXES: ktc-AFG,CHP-5;3-4.5ft
Highland Lynxes are hunting Cats that live in the less extreme
foothills and mountains throughout Endor. Although smaller than
the Snow Leopard of the mountains, they are still effective hunters
and fishers. Unlike most hunting Cats of this size, which are
usually loners, the Highland Lynx lives in prides of 5 to 8 cats.
These cats have an intricate social structure and hunt as a group like
Lions. Groups of Highland Lynxes bring down large game using
similar tactics to those employed by Wolves. If taken young, these
Cats make loyal, protective pets.

Animal Glossary: Apsanakûni
HOUNDS:
(f)-(IOSZ),(AU),(J)"3 ;
3-5ft
In Middle-earth, the term "Hound" (Q. "Huo": pl. "Huron")
almost always means the fierce Wolfhound (S. "Huadraug").
These creatures range in size from the (relatively) d i m i n u t i v e dogs
used by Hobbit farmers and shirriffs near the borders of the Shire
to the great and noble beasts used by the noble Men of old to hunt
the Wargs and werewolves of Morgoth. Hounds are found wherever there are Men or Hobbits; they also sometimes run wild in
desolate areas where Men no longer dwell.
Huan. A Noble Hound From Valinor, Huan was originally one of
the immortal hunting dogs of Oromë, the Huntsman of the Valar.
When he followed his first master, the Noldorin Elf Celegorm,
away from Valinor, he became mortal, but it was decreed by the
Valar that he would only die at the jaws of the mightiest Wolf of
Arda. Huan was more intelligent than any other hound since
seen in Middle-earth; he could even speak with words upon
occasion, as well as being exceptionally eloquent in the usual
houndish vocabulary of gestures and postures. He betrayed his
treacherous master to aid Lúthien and later Beren in the Quest
of the Silmaril. In this he met his doom; after killing numerous
werewolves and defeating Sauron when the evil Maia took wolfform, Huan both slew and was slain by Carcharoth, the huge
wolf bred by Morgoth to be the noble Hound's bane.
MADRATINES: mktc-AFM,CDH-3; 1.5-2.5 ft
The Madratine is a small cat-like Fox found mainly in the
highlands of Eriador. Its white mask and ears stand out in sharp
relief to its reddish brown fur. Madratine are very shy, nocturnal
creatures that prey on rodents, birds, insects, and lizards. Pairs
mate for life and generally occupy only one burrow during the
course of a year.
NORTH BEARS: cf-FGOSVW,HPT-6; 8-9 ft
Huge, pale gray or white bears found around the Ice Bay of
Forochel, the powerful Megliformen (Q. "North Bear"; pl.
"Megliformeni") are usually solitary creatures. They have an
excellent sense of smell and are superb swimmers. Subsisting
primarily on seal and fish, they range across well-defined coastal
territories. These parcels measure about one hundred square miles.
Since they are huge, strong, and can smell intruders up to two miles
away, they have little trouble policing their domain.
During the brief northern summers, the Megliformen roams
outside his or her range in search of a mate. During the long days,
they also gorge themselves on roots and berries.
LlSICAVI: nawms-BFVZ,DP-5;2-3ft
The Lisica (Ap. "Nightears"; pl. "Lisicavi") is a small, largeeared Fox found in Harad. Thriving in the cool of the desert night,
the Lisica hunts at night in pairs or small family groups. They feed
on the rodents and large insects and occasionally dig for sleeping
reptiles. They are hunted for their brilliant auburn coats.
MARSH MASTIFFS: wmkt-FM,DH-4;5-6ft
Marsh Mastiffs are tall, domesticated dogs found wherever the
Dúnedain have resided or had extensive commercial links. They
have long legs and short wiry coats, which are usually colored dark
brown or russet. Well-liked by shepherds, herders, and hunters,
they can be trained to many tasks. They are sure-footed, are good
swimmers, and have keen noses. Above all, they are fearless and
loyal to their masters. Therefore, they are often equipped with
collars (and even leather coats).

35
MERISC TYKA: wmkt-FM,DH-4;4-5ft
The Merisc Tyke (pl. "Merisc Tyka") is a wild dog found
throughout Rhovanion, Rhûn, and the lands of the Kykurian Kyn.
They arc related to the feral dogs of the Talath Harroch (the plains
south of Mirkwood). Frequenting the fens and moorlands in small
packs, they typically fish, scavenge for carrion, or attack small
mammals in order to survive. Tyka will, however, attack weak,
stranded, or bewildered cattle and have been known to prey on
sleeping or sickly Men. Fortunately, they are afraid of fire and are
easily scared off in the face of a torchlight. The Tyke has a dappled
coat of yellowish-tan and brownish-grey (giving it a +40 Hiding
bonus).
RED FOXES OF CALENARDHON: msk-F,HP-4; 2-3 ft
Unlike the common variety, the Red Fox of Calenardhon has
truly red, rather than just rust-colored, fur. Understandably, this
makes them a favorite target of fur hunters. Fortunately for the
survival of the species, they are also more intelligent than the
average Fox. Very clever about avoiding Men and anything that
might be a trap, these wily creatures rarely stumble into death; they
must be hunted.
Red Foxes are also canny thieves and steal not only hens and
rabbits but small, brightly colored objects. Unlike almost all other
carnivorous mammals, they enjoy some color vision.

RED WOLVES: mkt-F,CDP,ILX-5; 4.5-5.5ft
The old Eriadoran saying says: "Worry about the Wolf that you
don't see." This adage no doubt refers to the Red Wolf (S.
"Draucaran"; pl. "Draucerain"; Q. "Carnanarmo"; pl. "Carnanarmor"), the chief predator in settled reaches between the Misty
Mountains and the Blue Mountains. These beautiful Wolves are
particularly common in southern Eriador, from Cardolan south to
the Belegaer.
Unlike the common Grey Wolf, the Red Wolf is a vicious
hunter, tireless in the chase, and prone to kill simply for sport.
Their primary prey is Sheep, but Red Wolves are not afraid of Men
and they will readily attack lone individuals or small groups.
Sheep Hounds, however, have proved to be an effective counter to
these intelligent and ruthless canines.
SHEEP HOUNDS: wmkt-AFM,HP,INX-8; 5.5-7 ft
Dogs are popular among shepherds throughout Middle-earth.
One favorite breed is the Sheep Hound (Q. "Húoton"; pl.
"Húotoni"), a large, short-muzzled, long-haired Dog. They endure
harsh weather exceptionally well and perform even when fatigued.
Most importantly, their great size, stealth, and speed enable them
to ward off predators.
The Sheep Hound is very loyal, intelligent, and fierce. When
equipped with a stout armored collar, it is a match for two or three
Wolves. The Dúnedain also use them for hunting and as guard
Dogs. Experiments in using them as War Dogs, though, have been
failures. A smaller breed is often seen as a pet for women and
children.

36

Animal Glossary: Locations of Apsanakûni

Animal Glossary: Apsanakûni
SLOTH BEAR: nams-BFMOS,DH,LQR-3; 15-20ft
The dark brown Sloth Bear (Q. "Meglituika"; pl. "Meglituikar")
is a native of northwestern Harad and is especially prevalent in the
Umbar region. It is the largest Bear species in Middle-earth. A
huge, slow-moving, stupid creature that resembles a cross between
a conventional bear and the sloth of the rain forests, the Sloth Bear
has formidable claws that it uses primarily for digging the huge
networks of tunnels that make up its home. They can even dig
through soft or crumbling rock. These tunnel complexes are more
than ample enough for Men to live in. if they so desire. Sloth Bears
have little fear of other creatures and while not overtly aggressive,
they will not let other creatures stand in their way, literally
"digging" through them, if necessary.
Large and fat (2500 to 4000 lbs). Sloth Bears are difficult to kill.
Their vital organs are well protected by their huge bulk. Many
loremasters claim that, either
their skulls are unusually thick, or
their brains are not in their heads
(no alchemist or wizard has ever
made a careful dissection of
one!), or Sloth Bear brains are not
vital organs, for head blows
rarely even slow them down.
Sloth Bears eat whatever they can
get their claws on, in the mass
quantities required to maintain
their massive size.
SPOTTED LIONS:wmskt-BF,
HP,IX-5;4-5ft
The Spotted Lion gets its name
from the black spots on their
almost white underbellies; the
rest of their coat is a burnt orange
color. Although quite rare, due to
hunting, they still range throughout Cardolan. The lions are not
evil creatures and, while they are
extremely cunning, they are not
capable of speech. Their feud
with the wolves is old and bitter
and has probably contributed to
their decline more than the efforts
of Men. The Spotted Lions live in
small family groups, keeping
lairs in trees and caves. They prefer to hunt Fiara, but sheep will
do. Spotted lions are known to kill men in self-defense.
UNCAVI: nas-F,CP,L-5; 3.5-4.5ft
The Unca is a large Cat found in the hilly woodlands of Far
Harad. It is often the only large mammal in its ecosystem. Although somewhat like a Leopard in appearance, it is much smaller.
The Unca's pelt is patterned with splotches in various shades of
brown, giving the predator perfect camouflage amid the plants of
the forest. The Unca uses its coloring to excellent advantage as it
prowls the overgrown jungle floor or hides in low branches in
search of prey. The animal life of the wood is typically small and
quick, so most of the Cat's time is spent chasing through the leaves
of the brush. However, the sturdy build of the beast allows it the
prospect of turning to larger game when such might be available.
This stops short of the deadly Petla, but the playful Stetan is fair
game, and the Cat shows no reluctance to prey on Men as well,
when they can be taken quickly, and by surprise.

37
UNDARLAIF: wmskt-BF,HP,IX-5;4-5ft
The Undarlaif (Rh. "Leavings") are large, black jackals that
came into the Talath Harroch (southern Rhovanion plain) south of
Mirkwood at the time of the Great Plague of T.A. 1636-1637.
Originally migrating from the East, they now range from the
western flanks of the Orocarni (Q. "Red Mountains") to the eastern bank of the Anduin. Their reddish ears complement and soften
their distinct black coloring and their eerie blue eyes, lending them
an attractive and somewhat innocent guise that obscures their sly,
pitiless ways.
Undarlaif hunt mostly at night, moving and working in wellcoordinated packs of four to twenty. The packs hunt cooperatively
in a clever and sinister manner. First, they encircle a small group
of prey (Deer, Kine, Sheep, Men, etc.). Then some of them decoy
away the strongest defenders, while the others close in on the
choicest victims. In lean times,
however, they are not too proud
to scavenge for carrion and refuse; thus their name.
VUK: nams-BFOS,HP,ILX-7; .
4-5ft
The Vuk is a wild Hill Dog
native to the arid and semi-arid
hills of southern Endor. Large
numbers of them live in Far
Harad, Chy, Vaag, and Gaathgykarkan, and their range extends as far east as Horl. They
look vaguely like Wolves, but
their snouts are larger and
squarer and their pelt is a
mottled, dark tan color, spotted
with greys and brown. This coloring provides excellent camouflage in the scrub.
Given the strength of a Wolf
and the pride of a Jackal, the Vuk
is a resilient creature. Partial to
fresh meat, they hunt in packs.
However, when game is scarce,
these dogs quickly turn to carrion for sustenance. Adult Vuk
do not employ stealth; they hunt
in packs and, rather than stalking
and attacking from ambush, prefer to run their prey to exhaustion, circling it and giving off
their yelping barks until it stumbles and falls. Vuk are tireless runners; even the tough wild goats of the region have little hope of survival once the dogs begin their chase.
WAR-WOLVES: ktcf-AFVZ,CDHP,EILRX-7; 7.5-8.5 ft
Often mistaken for Wargs, War-wolves (S. "Ormaráka"; pi.
Ormarákar"; aka "Yelmaráka") are huge Dogs who have been bred
and trained for combat. They are frequently employed in large
numbers as trackers, scouts, or as a means of harassing enemy
armies. Some, like the War-wolves of Waw, are actually fielded
as combat units. Others, such as the War-wolves of Angmar, serve
as mounts for Orcish raiders and Ore-lords.
These creatures appear to be just overlarge Wolves. This is true,
but War-wolves are bolder, more violent, and much more cunning.

36

Animal Glossary: Apsanakûni & Other Dangerous Animals

5.8 OTHER DANGEROUS ANIMALS

WHITE FOXES: mktcf-AF,CDHP,L-3;3ft
The White Fox is found throughout the temperate highlands and
northern plains of Middle-earth. They arc especially famous in
Calenardhon (Rohan), where they are rare and where Gondorian
frontiersman and Rohir Lords prize them as hunting foes.
Actually only white in winter, the White Fox's dense pelt is
normally a bright, silvery grey. The long hairs readily pick up grass
pollen, often causing it, like the Grass Cats (above) to appear to be
a strange light green in color. Even during the winter, the coat is
adorned with black-tipped guard hairs that lend it silvery gleam, so
the Fox is hardly ever really white.
White Foxes live in shallow burrows and dine on small mammals, birds (especially ground birds), and their eggs, as well as
substantial quantities of large insects, such as grasshoppers.
WHITE WOLVES:
tcf-AFV,CDHP,L-7;7-8ft
White Wolves (S. "Drauglos"; pl. "Drauglys"; Q. "Lossanarmo"; pl. "Lossanarmor"; aka "Nimanno") are northerly kin
of the Dire Wolves (above) and are distantly related to the common
Grey Wolf. They are true denizens of the cold, thriving in
temperatures as low as -60°F (-50°C). Although most at home in
the Far North, they have been seen as far south as the Shire in
Eriador and the Celduin Valley in Rhovanion (usually during especially bad winters).
All that has been said of the Dire Wolves applies to the White
Wolves as well, but even more so; the need to survive as a species
in the frigid North has made these huge Dogs even more clever and
bold as hunters. Preying on everything from rodents and carrion
to well-armed Lossoth, they are the most dangerous of nonmagical canines.
Like the White Fox, the Drauglos has a glistening white coat
comprised of long, thick, hollow hairs which are set in a tough, oily
hide. Their small ears, two-chambered nostrils, and well-furred
feet are ideally suited for life on the ice and snow.

BOARS: hnwmk-F,CDHJ-5; 3.5-4.5 ft
Boars are fierce wild Pigs, the ancestors of all domesticated
varieties. They are found throughout the temperate regions of
Endor. The largest species, the Red Boar, is found in the woodlands east of the Orocarni (Q. "Red Mountains") in easternmost
part of the continent (particularly in Aegan). Exceptionally dangerous, generally nocturnal creatures, Boars are agile, quick, and
aggressive whenever they are alarmed. When angry, they will
charge straight at an enemy, regardless of its size, and bowl it over,
trampling the foe with sharp hooves and slashing it with even
sharper tusks. Injuries, unless to a limb, hardly slow a Boar down.
Boars are hunted all over Middle-earth. Men often hunt them
using special spears that have extra stout shafts, huge, sharp heads,
and (most important) a stout crossbar about 18 inches below the
point. The crossbar is handy because a speared Boar will run
straight up the spear to get at the hunter.
Omnivores, Boars eat bulbs, tubers, fruit, nuts, insects, and
carrion. They are most active at night and in the morning and travel
in groups of 1-20. Males (who can be distinguished by their long
canine-tusks) roam apart from, but close to, the females and young.
The Boar of Everholt. This huge example of porcine power had
become a byword for wildness and ferocity in the Firien Wood
on the borders of Rohan in T.A. 2864. King Folca of Rohan,
after cleaning all the Orcholds from Rohan, went to reward
himself with a true royal hunt, but it was the Boar who became
the hunter that day. Folca speared the Boar in a vital spot, but
this mighty creature still had enough strength left to gouge the
king to death with its mighty tusks. Boar and monarch died
together.
FEN BOARS: hnwmk-FM,HPR-5;3ft
Fen boars are smaller than their forest-dwelling relatives, who
can gorge on nuts all autumn. However, they make for good
hunting and tasty eating. Males can be dangerous if cornered,
lashing out with the long tusks they normally employ for digging
in the mud for tasty roots, as well as for grubbing out rotten meat.
Even more than other Pigs, Fen Boars enjoy berries, insects, and
fish in addition to their normal vegetarian diet.

GREY APES: hn-F,DJ-7; 4-5 ft tall
Grey, shaggy-haired, and heavily-built, Grey-apes (P. "Cijuvu
Niavi"; pl. "Cijuvu Niavimi"; S. "Peredrûgwath") are powerful
beasts that live alone, in pairs, or in small family groups in the
forests of Pel in southwestern Middle-earth. They stand up to 5' in
height and weigh up 300 to lbs. The Grey Ape's long arms reach
to its ankles when it stands erect, and its broad hands have
opposable digits. Coupled with its great upper body strength, these
features enable them to swing from tree to tree and climb with
amazing case. Their short, relatively weak legs prevent them from
running or walking efficiently. When they move about on the
jungle floor, either upright or on all fours, they travel exhibit an
awkward, halting gait.

39

Animal Glossary: Other Dangerous Animals
THE MAJMUN: naws-FM,D,I-4; 3-3.5 ft tall
Hordes of lively monkeys known as Majmun live among the
trees of the forest called "Gaj" in western Far Harad. They measure
only about three feet from head to tail and fly about the branches
like squirrels. Though not as highly intelligent as some of their
more developed relatives, the Majmun have charms that endear
them to Men who come to the Gaj. They are neither noisy nor
unclean, and they have grown to act quite tame in the presence of
the typical Haradan, though they may be more shy with folk who
act or dress outlandishly. Great swarms of Majmun wander the
grounds of the region's temples and behave so respectfully that the
faithful often insist that the beasts are there to worship.
These monkeys are quite attractive, with fur of gold and black,
patterned in speckles of light on dark. It is said, however, that the
monkeys represent a danger as well, to those who would molest
them. Tales recount foreign trappers who came hunting the lovely
pelts and met ghastly ends, swarmed by the chattering beasts.
SLIRDU: hnw-F,CDJ,E-7; 15-25 ft across
The Slird (pl. "Slirdu") is a strange arboreal creature found only
in the forests of the remote islands off the southeast coast of
Middle-earth. Most live in colonies of 2-40 individuals on the isle
of Vulm Shryac. Green or green with red stripes, Slirdu are fouror five-armed invertebrates that resemble both Squids and Starfish.
They are distantly related to both creatures and have adapted to life
on land by developing true lungs and a sophisticated network or
extremely thick, tough, well-insulated nerves that serve as aquasiskeleton. Each of the Slird's prehensile appendages joins with a
trunk that resembles a Squid's body and houses the beast's two
eyes and beak-like mouth. An opening just below the mouth
connects with an ink sack.
Slirdu reside in nests near the tops of trees and move through the
forest with alarming speed by grasping tree-limbs with their
powerful arms. True carnivores, they hunt mammals, birds, and
reptiles and consume about twenty pounds of meat a day. A Slird
catches its prey by enveloping it with one or more arms. Each arm
is equipped with a patch of suction-like pads that immobilize
most victims. In addition, the Slird can spray its prey with a slightly
toxic (2nd lvl) ink that stuns (RR failure 01 -50), blinds (RR failure
51 -75), or knocks out (RR failure 76+) the victim. The creature occasionally uses this thick, greenish liquid to cover its retreat,
precisely spraying an area as wide as 20' at ranges of up to 100'.
Slirdu are not particularly intelligent, since their rudimentary
brain is essentially a massive nerve root/brain stem. Instead, they
are more akin to well-honed killing organisms.
UVAG-AAK: hn-FM,DJ,R-7;5-6ft tall
Blood-drinking apes of the Tanturak jungle of the Mumakan in
southernmost Endor, the mysterious Uvag-Aak successfully defeated the Men and Elves who sought to settle in the region.
Intensely territorial, they will not range out of their jungle territories unless food becomes scarce. Blood is their primary and
preferred form of nutrition, but when times get lean, they will eat
the flesh of their victims as well. Uvag-Aak are very protective of
their own and will exact a horrible vengeance on any who dare k i l l
one of their kind, making sure that the blood- drained corpses of
their victims are placed where other would-be Uvag-Aak exterminators can see them.

ANIMAL NAMES
AND NAME-ROOTS
NOTE: Unless otherwise slated (e.g., by an "S" for
Sindarin), all these terms are Quenya
Aew
Aiwë
Alph
Alqua
Ammale/Ambale
Andamunda
Ango
Craban
Draug
Dúlin/Tinuviel
Filit
Hala
Halatirno
Hanya/Hanu
Huan/Hunen
Huo
Hwan
Ini/Inya/Ní
Kabor
Korko
Kua
Lhug/Lyg
Liante
Lingwe
Lóke
Lómelinde
Maiwe
Megli/Morko
Mundo
Nauro/Garm
Rá
Ráka
Roch/Roh
Rokko
Soron/Sorne
Tambaro/Tamró
Thoron
Toan
Ulundo/Ulgundó
Ván/Wán
Wilwarin
Ûn

(Small) Bird (S.)
(Small) Bird
Swan (S.) (pl. Elph)
Swan
Yellow Bird
Elephant
Snake (pl. Angwi)
Crow (S.) (pl. Crebain)
Wolf(S.)
Nightingale (S.)
(Small) bird (pl. Filiki)
(Small) Fish
Kingfisher
Male
Hound
Dog
Sponge, Fungus (pl. Hwandi)
Female (suffix)
Frog
Crow
Dove
Snake, Serpent (S.)
Spider
Fish
Serpent (pl. Lóki)
Nightingale
Gull
Bear
Bull
Wolf
Lion (pl. Rávi)
Wolf
Horse (S.) (pl. Rych)
Horse
Eagle (pl. Sorni)
Woodpecker
Eagle (S.) (pl. Therein; Thyryn)
Sheep
Monster (pl. Úvanimor)
Goose
Butterfly (pl. Wilwarindi)
Creature

40

Animal Glossary: Locations of Other Dangerous Animals

41

Monster Glossary: Demonic Water Monsters

6.0 MONSTER GLOSSARY
Monsters (Q. "Ulundor"; "Ulgundór"; "Úvanimor"; sing.
"Ulundo"; "Ulgundó"; "Úvanimo"), like animals, are creations of
Eru. They are creatures who owe their existence to the One and his
Flame Imperishable, the fire that gives life to all spirits. At the
same time, these beasts no longer conform to the original order, the
Balance of Things. Instead, they have been perverted in order to
serve the goals of Evil. Morgoth and his servants artificially
reformed them so that they embody new powers and transcend
Fate.
Problems accompany the so-called gifts conferred upon monsters by the Black Enemy. Most cannot reproduce unless bred by
a controlling overlord like Sauron. While long-lived or even
immortal, monsters live in constant pain or exist in a state of
unyielding anger. Although they are exceptionally strong or
possess strange and terrible power, they lack the capacity for truly
independent thought. Despite their freedom from the bonds of
Fate, they are driven by irresistable instincts. Monsters are the
tortured creatures.

6.1 DEMONIC WATER MONSTERS
DEMON WHALES: ktcf-OS-6; 60-70ft
Demon Whales are huge, carnivorous white or gray creatures
that live in the Ice Bay of Forochel. Their five-inch teeth can tear
steel, and they think it no problem to swallow a man whole (and,
in spite of old tales, it is unlikely that a man would survive long in
the roiling acids of the Demon Whale's stomach). They often
shatter whale boats or overturn larger vessels.
FELL TURTLES (FESTITYCELYN): nwmktcf-OS-8; 30ft
Fell Turtles are giant snapping turtles that prowl the seas and the
large rivers and lakes in central Middle-earth. Also called the
Turtle-fish or "Fastitocalon" (pl. "Festitycelyn"; S. "Aegcnimor"; pl. "Aeg-crymyr") these rare but formidable creatures
grow as large as fifty feet in length. They live in deep waters but,
when hungry or angry, may swim closer to the coast. There, they
hunt everything from large fish to small boats piloted by foolish
seamen.
NINEVET; OR GIANT HELLBENDERS: nwmxkt-FM-4;5-8ft
The Ninevet is an almost totally aquatic amphibian, a strange
and loathsome carnivore that inhabits marshes, swamps, lakes, or
slow-moving rivers throughout Middle-earth. It is very common
in the Nindalf (Wetwang) marshes. Ninevet float just below the
surface of the water, looking (if they are visible at all) like dead
logs. When they spot a potential victim ( anything from a duck to
a man, depending upon the size of the Ninevet), they erupt directly
below it. stunning the creature. If it is a small enough creature, the
prey is swallowed immediately. Otherwise, the Giant Hellbender
wrestles its victim to the bottom with its leathery paws and sharp
claws, holding it down until the struggle ceases. It then swallows
the victim at its leisure, relaxing and expanding its flexible maw to
lit the meal at hand. Ninevet can go for weeks without eating, but
have little stamina in action, so any creature large and strong
(Enough to offer a protracted struggle may be released as the
Ninevet swims off in search of easier prey.

RED JAWS:

wmskt-UV,L-5;4-6ft

An ugly, scaleless fish living in the depths of caverns, especially
in Moria, the monstrous Red Jaw has its eyes set in the top of its
head. Its gaping jaws, like those of the sea shark, contain up to seven
rows of sharp teeth (but this characteristic does not endear them to
Dwarves...). Aside from the bright red jaw and the luminescent
growths on their fins, the Red Jaw is colorless. These fish can
provide quite a brilliant display in a darkened stream or lake, as
their luminescent red fins flick to and fro; they can provide quite
a display of another sort as they swallow a dog or goat whole or
devour a Dwarf's leg in seconds.
VODYANOI: nwmskt-FM-7; 5-6 tall (8-10 extended)
The Vodyanoi is a relative of the Giant Hellbender. An aquatic
carnivore, it prefers the flesh of mammals, especially people, over
all other treats. Growing up to 6' tall, it resembles a giant, black
frog. It lurks in dank pools, below the water, ready to strike. Then
the Vodyanoi either drags its prey into the water in order to drown
it, or swallows the victim whole. Like a snake, it can dislocate its
own jaw to swallow creatures larger than its mouth would normally
allow. The Vodyanoi has huge eyes which it sometimes uses to
distract and hypnotize its prey. (Anyone so affected must make a
5th level RR, adding any available PR, but no other, bonus.)
WATCHERS IN THE WATER: wmskt-FM-8;
50-70 feet (including tentacles)
Watchers in the Water are freshwater Kraken that normally
reside in the pools of the Underdeeps. Sometimes, however, they
swim into above ground meres. Such was the case with the
Watcher at the West Gate. This creature remained unknown to any
of the Free Peoples until near the end of the Third Age, when it
emerged from the depths of Moria into the Sirannon ("Gate
Stream") by the West Gate of Moria, damming the Sirannon to
form a gloomy lake in what had been a little valley. Driven by
Sauron's evil will, it waited for prey there by the West Gate,
catching at least one Dwarf and a number of foolhardy beasts and
Orcs before encountering the Fellowship of the Ring in early T.A.
3019. Then, it nearly captured Frodo, the Ringbearer, as the party
entered Moria.
It is not known what happened to the Watcher after the War of
the Ring. Without Sauron's hatred guiding its movements, it may
have returned to the Underdeeps. Alternatively, it may still be in
the Gate Pool, waiting for victims to puzzle over the inscription on
the West Gate.

ANIMATE PLANTS
Animate plants transcend the boundaries between the Olvar
and the Kelvar. They are actually Olvar, but they embodify
many of the qualities associated with living things that move:
independent movement of limbs, rational thought, active
senses, and in some cases even speech. Originally cared for
by the Vala Yavanna, many are, like other monsters, no longer
considered part of the Order of Things.

Monster Glossary: Animate Plants & Demons

42

EVIL HUORNS AND TREES
These wild animated trees come in many forms. Most are
simply vile plants twisted by Morgoth and his minions. The
trees of Mirkwood are prime examples of this hideous
handiwork. Like predatory animals, they k i l l their fellow
Olvar, using secretions from their roots or strangling tendrils. Many of these trees also secret a misty air that puts
travellers to sleep (treat as a 3rd level Sleep spell).
Evil Huorns were in the charge of the Ents for the most
part, although some of them, particularly the evil, "blackhearted" ones, went away from Fangorn Forest and the
protection and direction of the Ents. Many of these wayward
Huorns settled in Mirkwood, where they maliciously preyed
upon living beings out of some perverse need, for Huorns do
not eat, any more than Ents do. Huorns come in as many different forms as trees do.
Old Man Willow. A Powerful Huorn of the Old Forest, this
evil animate tree had much power over the other animate
trees of the Old Forest of Eliador (in Cardolan, near the
Shire). It hated all living, fire-using creatures and sought
to destroy them. Old Man Willow had a "singing" magicproduced by waving its fronds and branches, causing the
air to sigh and whistle through them. It generally used this
sound as a Sleep spell of 15th level, persuading victims to
fall asleep within reach of its twining roots or the gaping
cracks in its trunk. Then it disposed of them by throwing
them into the nearby River Withywindle to drown or by
drawing them into its trunk and crushing them, thus
providing itself with fertilizer. Alternatively, it could use
Confusion or Fear spells to distract or drive off its foes.
The Bearer's Sleeping Root. A beautiful, reddish, sprucelike root, this evil plant is the enchanted remnant of a giant
tree which once stood on the shores of eastern Endor. This
600 foot tall tree was planted by Morgoth's minions and
sprang from a cursed seed of Telperion, the Silver Tree of
Valinor. Poisoned by the foul secretions of Ungoliant, it
sent out a network of roots that comingled with and
dominated every plant within a league. Fortunately, it was
cut down by the Elf-lord Ingwë before it slaughtered or
perverted all of the local Olvar and made easternmost
Endor unliveable.
The Istar Alatar discovered the Sleeping Root around
T.A. 1200 and foolishly nurtured it out of dormancy in
order to understand its nature and borrow its strength. The
Root's power is immeasurable and, if given the chance to
grow again, the danger it presents is beyond comprehension. Sentient and exceedingly evil, the foul Root seeks to
control all its fellow Olvar, seeding new trees that share its
awful purpose.
The Sleeping Root is but a shadow of its former self.
Located in a 120 foot deep pit, it is a mass of entangled subterranean limbs about 300 feet across. It is sheltered from
the elements, since the opening to the pit is only 6 feet in
diameter.
The Root's limbs can move up to 30' in a given round,
striking foes with one to ten +60 Grappling & Unbalancing attacks. Once in the Root's grasp, victims receive one
+ 100 Huge Crush attack per enveloping limb, as well as a
12th level dose of Durthrond. (RR failure of 01-l00
results in victim falling into sleep for 1-100 hours; RR
failure of 101+ results in the victim's death.)

6.2 DEMONS
Demons (Q. "Raukar"; sing. "Rauko"; S. "Raug" or "Rog"; pl.
"Ryg") are evil Spirits, generally lesser Maiar who have been
corrupted by the Black Enemy. Tied to a hideous Fana (Q. "Veil";
"Radiant Figure"; aka "Body ") that manifests the theme or element
they originally represented, a Demon can never assume a fairseeming form. Their body, though, is critical to their existence in
Middle-earth.
Like all Spirits, Demons are immortal and do not reproduce.
Each is a singular entity.
BALROGS: (-)-EKX-9; 15-18 ft tall
NOTE: You can find more detailed information about
Balrogs and other Maiar in ICE's supplement entitled Lords
of Middle-earth, Volume I.
Words cannot fully describe the terror and awe of the sight of the
great Balrogs (S. "Demons of Might"; properly pl. as "Belryg"; Q.
"Valarukar"; sing. "Valarauko"), those evil Spirits of Fire that who
were among the first allies of Morgoth in the early days of Arda.
The Red Book of Westmarch describes the Balrog of Moria as:
"...a dark form, of man-shape maybe, yet greater... flames
roared up to greet it, and wreathed about it... its swirling
mane kindled and blazed behind it. In its right hand was a
Made like a stabbing tongue of fire; in its left it held a whip
of many thongs... the shadow about reached out like two vast
wings... Fire came from its nostrils..."
— LotRI, p. 428.
This fell creature was one of the last of its kind, for it is certain
that although Morgoth may have won the loyalty of many of these
dread Spirits of Flame in the earliest days, many were destroyed in
the wars against Elves and Men. Also, there are some among the
Wise who claim that there were never very many of them: "No
more than seven," was the opinion of one old sage. Yet Balrogs,
unless slain by some mighty force, are immortal, as they are true
Maiar, lesser beings of the kind that made the Dwarves and caused
the stars to shine. Little wonder, then, that they command such
power and such awe. The powers and abilities of Balrogs are
legion: they can fly; their force of will and their very presence is so
great that all must quail before them, if only for a moment in the
case of the valiant; they can wield a weapon in either hand so that
each strikes as if wielded by a gigantic Master of Arms; they can
seize control of a foe's will and mind, forcing him to do their
bidding or shattering his mind beyond repair; they can burn with
a fire as fierce as that of a volcano under almost any conditions, and
only total immersion in a large quantity of water can douse the
flames, which immediately rekindled as soon as the Balrog reaches
a drier environment; they can throw certain spells with the skills of
the most powerful Magician. Their specific areas of spell mastery
are those of fire (of course), detection, and contacting other evil
spirits and beings. Balrogs' thought processes are not for the
mortal and basically Good to fathom, but it is known that they are
fiercely loyal to the Black Foe of the World and that they have long
memories for spites and insults against him.
They are immensely proud and have a certain aesthetic bent that
reveals itself whenever they have the opportunity to be in charge
of constructing a fortress or other building. The throneroom of the
Balrog of Moria is a good example: a vaulted cavern is lit from
above by the eerily beautiful flickering of living flame from the
heart of the world and furnished with columns in the shape of
flaming Dragons (one of the few other types of creatures that
Balrogs respect) and arching red bridges of the magical glass called
laen. Spirits of Fire, the Balrogs display the character and power
of the most fascinating of destructive forces in every facet.

Monster Glossary: Demons
Gothmog, Lord of Balrogs and High Captain of Angband. All
Balrogs are terrifying and awesome, so it is virtually impossible
to adequately describe Gothmog, the most powerful of all the
Balrogs that ever burned in Arda. Gothmog was of such might
and majesty that a persistent rumor that has echoed down the
Ages has portrayed him as the son of Morgoth Himself— an
unlikely thought at best. In any case, Gothmog was responsible
for a great part of the misery of Arda in in the First Age. Many
were the Elven heroes who fell to his whip and blade before he
was killed in mortal combat with Ecthelion of the Fountain in
the siege of Gondolin in First Age 511.
The Balrog of Moria. This mighty creature was perhaps the last
of his kind. Certainly no Balrog had been seen in Arda since the
Great Battle that ended the First Age, and only the Elves and the
Wise (including the Istari) knew of them beyond the oldest tales
and dimmest rumors. The Dwarves that reentered Moria near
the end of the Third Age had dug
deep, perhaps more deeply than
had any mortal creature before,
and uncovered this menace from
its self-induced coma in hiding in
the roots of Moria. Aroused and
rested, the Balrog once again felt
its power and pride; perhaps, too,
it felt the Power its Lord's lieutenant, Sauron of Mordor, reaching
into the world. It killed two of the
Dwarf-kings and gathered to itself a mighty army of Orcs and
Trolls from the surrounding area
by the force of its will alone. With
these troops it drove the surviving
Dwarves from Moria and established itself as Master.
What it would have done if it
had captured the One Ring? It is
doubtful that it would have surrendered it to Sauron. Would it
not rather have wielded it itself,
confident that it was a better pupil
of the Foe of the World than the
Lord of Mordor? The answers are
unknown, since Gandalf the
Grey, an Istar and thus a Maia
himself, fought and vanquished
this awful Lord of Moria — sacrificing his Fana in the process.
Lungorthin. Lungorthin was the second strongest of the renegade
Fire-spirits. Only Gothmog, Lord of the Balrogs, was more
powerful. As a result, Lungorthin was able to secure the
position of the Master of the Melkoric Guard at Morgoth's
capital in Thangorodrim (S. "Mountain of Tyranny"). He
served as Morgoth's bodyguard.
Lungorthin was known as the White Balrog, for his slimy,
fire-encased form was pale and whitish and the flames that
engulfed him had a pure, colorless quality.
BLACK DEMONS: (-)-EK-7 to 9; size varies greatlyaccording to type
Black Demons are lesser Maiar who have allied themselves with
Morgoth. Their forms vary infinitely, as do their abilities. They
can sometimes be persuaded to aid Men or Elves in evil deeds (or

43

even in good ones, if heavily constrained by a Good power of great
might), but unless the evil-doer requesting this service has protected himself or herself carefully and laid the strongest constraints
on the Demon, little good will come of such bargains in the end.
Demons often partake of some of the characteristics of natural
forces: Balrogs (see above) as Spirits of Fire are a very good
example. This is, no doubt, because of Eru's original plans for
these spirits as directors and guardians of these natural forces.
The Dindae of Nan Gulduin: Slyardach. A hideous, foggylooking creature capable of disguising itself in shadows and
moving with utmost silence, the Dindae Slyardach serves the
evil animist Lhachglin, an agent of Sauron's in Mirkwood's
northern reaches. Constrained by the Dark One's will to serve
the whims of the animist, this Demon serves as messenger and
envoy to the troops of Orcs and Spiders that guard Sarn Goriwing, the animist's fortress, from a distance. Presumably, the
Dindae would also make an excellent
assassin. Disturbing to look upon
because of its vagueness of form
(anyone beholding it constantly must
strain their eyes as they gaze, convinced that there is something in that
mist; actually, of course, the Dindae
is the mist), this Demon is in addition
a sadist given to sneaking up on
things and half-strangling them, then
leaving them to jump at shadows
forever after.
The Demons of Aglarond. These
four Demons are thought to be but
one, since no one has ever seen all
four at once; they do not get along
very well. Strong but stupid, they are
obviously the very dregs of demonhood. Remnants of Morgoth's First
Age scouting units, they have lived in
the caverns of Aglarond ever since
without direction. They seem to have
little inclination to do much on their
own unless their territory is invaded.
Then they become fierce and attack;
they are said to drink the blood of
their foes. It may be imagined that
they do this to further terrify wouldbe invaders, as Demons have no need
of physical sustenance. Eight feet in height, with slimy black
skins, clawed hands and feet that can crush rock, glowing red
eyes, and large mouths filled with fangs, these demons are
unattractive to even the most forgiving of viewers.
Lesh-Y of the Court of Ardor. One of two Demons with full
membership status in the villainous Court of Ardor in southern
Middle-earth (Mourfuin was the other — see below), Lesh-Y
was not a very ferocious sort of Demon unless fully aroused in
anger. Perhaps originally a disciple of Aulë the Smith, craftsman of the Valar, Lesh-Y's passion was the making of magic
items, which he did with a skill never seen since the demise of
Fëanor, who made the Silmarils. Seven feet tall, with an oily
skin like red leather, totally bald, and with pointed ears and long
clawlike nails, Lesh-Y was no beauty, but when in his workshop, bent over some wondrous item on which he was working,
he had a certain dignity and pride. It is unknown what eventually became of him.

Monster Glossary: Demons
Mourfuin, the Lord Demon of Ardor. Not nearly as eventempered or harmless as Lcsh-Y. Mourfuin was a member of the
Court by dint of his physical powers and his command over
lesser demons, whom he could summon to do his bidding.
Basically a Fire Demon, with powers of immolation like a lesser
Balrog, Mourfuin could vary his stature as needed, from 6 to 16
feet in height. Like Lesh-Y, he had skin resembling oiled red
leather and pointed ears. He could attack with his clawed hands
but much preferred to use his whip and sword, again after the
fashion of a Balrog. Mourfuin could also throw Fire spells.
Razarac. The demonic Razarac is the most terrible monster in Far
Harad, the most awful denizen of the Haradwaith. Known as
"The Destroyer" by the Haradrim, it is a powerful, gruesome
holdover from the armies of Morgoth in the Elder Days.
Legends say that the Razarac was placed under the stone of the
Ogladalo Vatra when the desert was formed, to prevent the
water from being returned to the surface. However, in recent
years Men have broken the seals to those deep caverns, and now
this terror prowls the night under the open sky. Physically, the
beast is shaped like a Great Mountain Troll. Its hide is thick,
tough, and coarse, giving it the protection of plate armor. For
combat, it is armed with fierce talons hand and foot, as well as
fangs set into huge and powerful jaws. From the massive
shoulders spread leathery wings which, though they will not
carry the monster on long journeys, will allow extended leaps
of up to 200 yards.
The terrifying aspect of the beast's demeanor is further
enhanced by its fiendish intellect. It has mastery of all Essence
spells dealing with fire or light to t w e n t y - f i f t h level, and is
capable of advanced tactical thinking, as well as employing
devilish cleverness in toying with its intended victims. The
Razarac's years of captivity guarding the stolen waters of Harad
have burned into its mind a continuing desire to prevent men
from reaching water sources, and in this pursuit it shows a
dogged singularity of purpose. Thus far. The Destroyer has
limited its hunting to the Mirror itself, where it attacks bands of
desert men as they drink by wells. It is only a matter of time,
though, before the greater oases of the land beckon to the beast,
offering much greater opportunities for destruction. Then the
nomads and caravans of the land will quake with fear with the
first footstep of each desert journey.
The Winds of Taurang. Demons of the Wind and Air, the
diabolical Winds of Taurang served the whims of Taurclax, evil
Animist of the Court of Ardor in the Mumakan region of
southernmost Middle-earth. The evil bargain that Taurclax had
made with the Winds is that he would suffer with his new allies
when they were "killed" (impossible to do) or incapacitated by
becoming incapacitated himself. The Winds appear as slender
figures wrapped, cloaked, and masked in black. They are armed
with evil magical blades known as kynacs; these blades are
poisoned. The Winds can change into the form that their name
implies, and in this way they can enter any place that is not
airtight; they are able to carry their weapons with them while
doing so. They cannot fight in this form, however, and it takes
them 6 rounds to regain solid status (or vice versa); they cannot
change form while stunned. The Winds are called, from least
to mightiest, Aur, Kax, Eos, Can, Ior, and Kel. When destroyed
in any fashion, the Winds return to Taurclax's fortress of
Taurang and recover for 66 days. Taurclax is out of action for
the number of days equal to the level of the defeated Wind.

L A S S A R A U K A R : Lesser: (-)-CD-7: 6'-7'; Greater: (-)-CD-8;
7-8'
Lassaraukar (Q. "Demons of the Leaves"; "Leaf-demons"; sing.
"Lassarauko"; S. "Lethryg" sing. "Lathrog") are awful nocturnal
creatures, Wood-spirits seduced and corrupted by Morgoth and
refashioned into savage arboreal predators. Few monsters possess
their fetish for unrestrained terror. Immortal but unable to reproduce (or be bred), these heinous creatures possess such refined
hearing and smell that they can sense things with the precision of
Elven sight. Nothing surpasses them in speed or agility, for they
can run along the branches of trees and leap across gaps in the
woods faster than a Swift can fly. A Lassarauko can start, change
direction, and stop (but only at predetermined location) virtually
instantly.
Lassaraukar look like tall, featureless Men. Their entire body is
covered with a sort of greenish hide, a thick skin which resembles
tight clothing. This covering extends over their entire body,
including the face. On the feet, it is an inch thick and permeated
by bizarre mole-like protrusions, "gripper-like" soles designed to
accentuate their already stunning traction. Their hairless heads are
also adorned with a second outer skin. Extending down from a
heavy bone brow which surrounds the Lassarauko's skull, this
semi-transparent layer flaps down over their lower head, obscuring
the creature's facial features. Lassaraukar pull the skin up when
eating, but retreat behind its light-shielding protection at all other
times.
Lassaraukar normally live in "lats" of six: five lesser led by one
greater. Omnivores, they reside in dark "nests" and live on tree
products, but retain a quaint fondness for raw meat, particularly
fresh brains. Their diet is ideal given their peculiar routine, for
Lassaraukar are active less than an hour a day. Although they are
capable of moving about for up to six hours, they prefer to rest.
This is no doubt due to the fact that, when they move, Leafdemons run at startling speeds (a Lassarauko "walking pace" is
1000'/rd). Lassaraukar rest (i.e., stand still) for the vast majority of
each day; however, when they elect to move they can burst forward
like a blurring wind (5000'/rd when dashing). Effortlessly leaping
distances of up to 100', they move along tree limbs with the ease
of a skilled monkey. When at rest, they spread their arms to their
sides and stare forward in a rigid pose, as if statues. (This
absolutely immobile form of relaxation has led many an unwitting
victim to believe he was surrounded by sculptures, only to later
'discover' that his brain was missing.)
Lassaraukar remain still when attacking. Using but a fraction of
a second's momentum, a Lassarauko strikes by swinging its arms
back along its side, up behind its back, over its shoulders, and then
down until pointing straight forward. This wheeling motion brings
their head down and upper body forward, and pulls two natural
bone discs out of the Lassarauko's interior chest reservoir. These
sharp, 2" diameter discs travel along an exposed bone track on the
Lassarauko's inner arm; then they are flung forward at amazing
speed. Deadly missiles, they are coated with a fluid of diluted
Lassarauko blood, which serves as a third level nerve poison. Such
attacks are always preceded by at least one round's movement, for
the Leaf-demon must generate momentum. With a dull reserve of
fifty discs, a Lassarauko can initiate twenty-five dual attacks over
the course of fifty rounds (supply renews at rate of 3/hr).

Monster Glossary: Demons
While the Lesser Lassaraukar rely on their hideous missiles,
greater Leaf-demons employ another enchanted means of assault.
Truly blind, they have magical, amber-like eyes which pierce their
facial covering. These emit bolts of stored and concentrated
sunlight even when the creature is (and has been) motionless,
making greater Lassaraukar exceptionally deadly. Unfortunate
adventurers who take them for statues and attempt to steal their
valuable eyes (500 gp) usually find the experience to he an
unwelcome climax to their journey.
Still, the best way to attack a Lassarauko is while it is motionless.
When it moves, it is virtually unhittable (unless caught in a
confined area, when DB drops). Fortunately, since Lassaraukar
must decide where to start, turn, or stop seconds ahead of time, they
can be ambushed even while moving. One need only know their
exact path. Once the Lassarauko stops, of course, any readied
attack will serve quite well. With a successful orientation roll, an
adventurer can react to the Lassarauko's pause. Then, assuming
the dauntless warrior does not swallow a disc or two, he can fell the
pitiless creature.
This poisonous blood serves as a lubricant, and it is peculiar to
one variety of Lassarauko. According to legend, there are six "ilats" of Leaf-demons, each being a group of six lats. The blood of
each i-lat is reputedly unique, and it is said that Lassarauko blood
types equate with the six forms of poison: circulatory, conversion,
muscle, nerve, reduction, and respiratory. These same tales speak
of the greater Lassaraukar from each i-lat as having gemstone eyes
which cast differing bolts of power. Some supposedly use
lightbolts. while others use fire, air, water, cold, and earth. Given
the nature of incantations, this is possible, but hardly plausible.
Lesser Leaf-demons suffer a -50 penalty when operating in
natural daylight (-100 if their facial skin is folded up). They are
found in groups of six (including one greater Lassarauko leader).
Greater Lassaraukar only operate at -25 in natural daylight.
UNGOLIANT, DEMON OF THE VOID: (-)-EK-9;
variable but usually 36' across
NOTE: You can find more detailed information about
Ungoliant in ICE's supplement entitled Lords of Middleearth, Volume I.
Ungoliant (Q. "Great Spider-monster") is a Great Enemy, the
most powerful Demon ever to enter Arda. She was a Spirit of the
Void (Nothingness), the incarnation of Darkness, and the embodiment of utter Destruction. One of Morgoth's earliest allies,
Ungoliant rebelled against his service, for she became obsessed
with light, wanting only to devour it and turn it into her own special
Darkness, the Unlight, that destroyed all Light and Good things.
When Morgoth later desired the Silmarilli (Great Jewels), it was no
hard task for him to persuade Ungoliant to join in a raid on Valinor,
for when she heard of the Jewels, she desired them for herself. She
cloaked both herself and her master in her Unlight and wove webs
of Darkness for them to climb into Valinor, and so they came upon
the Blessed Realm in a time of festival. They then poisoned the
Two Trees and fled with the Jewels.
When they reached their dark refuge, they quarreled over the
spoils, and Ungoliant grew in rage to such a size and might that
Morgoth himself was terrified and cried out to his Balrogs to save
him. The Spirits of Fire chased Ungoliant with their flaming
whips, and she fled into a dark valley. There she found other
creatures of her own sort, but less great, and she and they were of
the shape that the Free Peoples call spiders. There she lived and

45

mated and reproduced. Shelob (see below) was one of her brood,
and there were many others, some lesser and some nearly as great.
No one knows what became of Ungoliant, but some of the Wise
claim that her hunger at last became too great for her, and having
already devoured her woeful mates, she proceeded to consume
herself.
VAMPIRES OF MORGOTH (-)-EK-9; Man-sized
Melkoric Vampires are not the blood-drinking undead spirits of
Men; rather they are mighty Demons. These Spirits were once the
patrons of harmless normal Bats, but under Morgoth's tutelage
they became great doers of evil and sources of terror. They are
mighty fliers, and in early times Morgoth frequently used them as
messengers. Appearing as gigantic Bats with the faces of hideous
Men or Women and the feet of enormous birds of prey, the
Vampires were well-equipped to deliver the orders of Morgoth and
to spy for him. Vampires can assume other forms by means of their
magical shaping cloaks. (These cloaks could also give others the
power to take on the shape of Vampires.)
Thuringwethil, Messenger of Angband and Tol-in-Gaurhoth.
This female Vampire was a favorite of Sauron and served as his
messenger during the Quest of the Silmaril in the First Age. It
was her shape that the Half-maia Lúthien used to gain entrance
to Angband, for Thuringwethil (S. "Woman of the Secret
Shadow") lost her powers and her cloak of shaping when Tolin-Gaurhoth (S. "Isle of Werewolves") fell and Sauron fled, he
himself taking the form of a Vampire.

46

6.3 DRAGONS
Dragons (Q. "Lóki"or"Angulóki"or"Valóki"; sing. "Lóke"or
"Angulóke" or "Valóke"; S. "Engwai": sing. "Angwa"), or
Drakes, are the most famous and feared monsters in Middle-earth.
No race of creatures instills so much awe, or is cause for so much
wonder and story-telling. They are Morgoth's supreme conception.
THE ORIGINS OF DRAGONS
Little is known of the beginnings of Dragons. While their
origins are tied to the breeding pits of Utumno (Q. "Hellish Chasmhold"; aka "the Underworld"), where Morgoth wrought the first
Cold-drakes, the Dragon-race achieved its splendor later in the
First Age. Fire-drakes (Q. "Urulóki" or "Fealóki"; sing.
"Urulóke" or "Fealóke") and the great Winged Drakes (Q.
"Rdmalóki"; sing. "Ramalóke") — the Dragons of lore — were
born of fire and magic in the halls of Thangorodrim (S." Mountains
of Tyranny") in Angband. Since that time, many lesser, more
specialized species have appeared, although none in such numbers
as to destroy the Balance of Things.
According to Sauronic scribes. Iaurlóke the Cold was the first
true Drake. He was born in Angband (S. "Iron Prison") during the
long struggle between Morgoth and the Eldar of Beleriand. He
sired Glaurung, the Father of Dragons and the first of the Firedrakes, but Glaurung consumed him in an ireful duel less than a
century later. Soon afterwards. Glaurung burst forth out of
Thangorodrim and wreaked havoc on the Elves of Dorthonion and
Hithlum (in Beleriand). He burned the fields of Ard-galen in his
youthful display of raw power. Because Glaurung was only halfgrown, though, Fingon and his archers of Fingon drove the young
Dragon back to Angband. Morgoth was incensed, for Glaurung's
rash assault destroyed any hope of surprising the Free Peoples with
the full might of a Fire-drake. So ended the world's first encounter
with a true Dragon.
Two centuries passed before the Worm of Morgoth appeared
again. Then, at the Battle of the Sudden Flame (S. "Dagor
Bragollach"), Glaurung successfully led the forces of darkness in
the struggle to break the siege of Angband. He slaughtered
hundreds of Elves and razed large areas of eastern Beleriand before
the campaign ended. Returning home triumphant, Glaurung began
a long repose.
Glaurung endured the ensuing peace by breeding and producing
a brood of lesser Dragons. When they came of age, he guided them
into combat. This was the first time a group of Drakes ever
appeared together. During the Fifth Battle of the First Age, the
"Battle of Unnumbered Tears," they decimated a combined army
of Elves and Men. Only the valor of the Dwarves of Belegost
averted the complete defeat of the Free Peoples.
In subsequent years Glaurung and his offspring helped secure
the lands conquered by the armies of the Black Enemy. They used
their powerful incantations to bind the minds of their defeated foes
and bring them under Morgoth's sway. Glaurung e v e n t u a l l y
assailed the Elf-city of Nargothrond, slaying all of its inhabitants
save its Warlord, Túrin Turambar. Glaurung's power was such
that he first bewitched Túrin and drove him off, leaving the city
open to assault.
Túrin vowed revenge, but Glaurung's plottings bore another
evil before the two came together again. The awful Worm placed
a spell on Túrin's sister, Nienor, and stole her memory. This curse
led to her unfortunate and ill-fated marriage to Túrin.

Monster Glossary: Dragons
Turin tracked Glaurung down at Cabed-en-Aras and drove the
great sword Gurthang deep into the Dragon's underbelly. As the
Fire-drake died, he lifted his spell... letting Nienor recover her
memory. She committed suicide following the terrible revelation
that she had married her brother and carried his child. Griefstricken and burning from Glaurung's caustic black blood, Turin
perished as well.
Glaurung's death marked the end of the first and longest chapter
in the story of the great Drakes of the North. While he was the
Father of Dragons and exceptionally powerful, Glaurung was not
the greatest Drake ever to enter Endor. That distinction goes to
Ancalagon the Black — the mighty Winged Dragon known as
"Rushing-jaws."
Like Glaurung, Ancalagon was a Fire-drake: but unlike his
predecessor, the Black Dragon was far larger and possessed the
power of flight. He was the first and most awesome of his kind. His
wings darkened the skies, while hurricane-winds swept the plains
before he unleashed his unstoppable fire. Undoubtedly the greatest monster born in Middle-earth, Ancalagon was the culmination
of Dragon-breeding.
Fortunately, Ancalagon proved relatively short-lived. He was
slain soon after he first appeared, during the War of Wrath. There
he dueled with the Great Eagles, who were led by their King,
Thorondor. The skies turned black with smoke and thunder ripped
through the clouds as the giant avians dueled. In the midst of this
unparalled aerial fray, the warrior Eärendil — who came out of the
West on the flying ship Vingilot — cut the Dragon down with a
remarkable bowshot. Ancalagon fell, creating an upheaval that
shattered the peaks below. His fellow Dragons fled amidst the
turmoil.
Ancalagon died at the very end of the First Age, just as a cataclysm struck and sank Beleriand and began reshaping Endor.
Many of the other Dragons escaped the destruction and, like their
brethren in Utumno and the other Underdeeps, went elsewhere in
Middle-earth. Some settled in the Grey Mountains, while others
ventured further east and south. As the Second Age dawned,
Morgoth's legacy spread. Dragons remained to someday haunt
virtually every corner of the Endor.

THE NATURE OF DRAGONS
Physically, these so-called Giant Worms vary in size and appearance. Some slither or crawl; others run, jump, or fly. Most
have vision that surpasses that of the most keen-sighted of birds,
while others can perceive smells better than a North Bear. All share
a common heritage, though, and have scaly hides, two to four
horns, and long, serpentine bodies. Those with limbs have four
appendages, although two may be modified to support wings.
Razor-like talons crown their nimble digits.

47

Monster Glossary: Dragons

GENERAL FEATURES OF DRAGONS

(1) Critical strikes— Unless otherwise noted, critical strikes
against a Dragon are rolled on the Super Large Creature Critical
Strike Table. This applies to both physical attacks and spells. (Use
MERP CT-10 and CT-11 or Arms Law 10.15 and Spell Law
10.85.)
(2) Armor — Dragonskin varies in strength. The overlapping
plates toughen with age. Unless otherwise stated, younger Drakes
have scales equivalent to Rigid Leather (AT 12), while mature
Worms have armor equal to the finest Plate (AT 20). This
enchanted material resists (DB bonus of +2 x beast's lvl) all forms
of directed spell attacks and shields the creature from the harshest
of elements. In order to make a suit of armor out of Dragonskin, an
adventurer must first cut the scales and the underlying hide from the
Drake's body, all the while contending with the beast's toxic blood.
This is a considerable feat. Even then, however, sewing and
molding a suit of armor made from such an enchanted material will
require the work of both an armorer and an alchemist.
(3) Spells — Dragons are powerful spellcasters. Enchanted
creatures, they possess the inherent ability to cast any spell from the
Calm Spirits and Detection Mastery spell lists (Open Channeling at
page 65 in MERP; Closed and Open Channeling in RM). Most also

know the Lore and Item Lore lists (Open Channeling at page 65
in MERP; Bard Base in RM) as well. Many Worms are powerful
Mages, Sorcerers, Bards, etc.
(4) Strength of form — Dragons come in many forms.
Winged Dragons and Cave Drakes tend to be slenderer than
normal, while Cold-drakes are stouter. Winged Dragons can stir
the air within a range of 1000', creating the equivalent of a local
hurricane (treat as +20 Airbolt attack). Drakes rarely suffer from
penalties associated with age, nor do they weary easily. They
require no rest during a given day. When they sleep, however,
they rest for 1 -100 days on end and they are hard (-10) to stir from
their slumber. Dormant, or "hibernating," Dragons sleep for 101000 years.
(5) Enhanced Senses — The Dragons can see perfectly well
in utterly dark places, and they can sense the shapes of creatures
from the Shadow-world (e.g., Nazgûl). They also have excellent
(+30 to Perception Rolls) vision, hearing, smell, and taste.
(6) Presence — Anyone coming within sight of a Dragons
makes a RR versus a 5th level Fear spell. With a RR failure of
01 -50, the victim flees in terror for 1 -5 minutes. If the RR failure
is 51-100, the victim flees in fear for 1-100 minutes. If the victim
fails by 101+, he falls under the control of the Worm for 1-100
rnds. In addition, a Dragon use his fiery red eyes to captivate an
individual, his concentrated gaze being the equivalent of a Spirit
Mastery spell (permits use of any one spell on Calm Spirits list
in MERP or Spirit Mastery list in RM).
(7) Foul Breath — If he possesses a breath-weapon, a Worm
can use it once every 1 -3 minutes (6-18 rounds depending on the
age of the beast). It can attack up to 2x its lvl in a given day. They
can concentrate their breath into a bolt (e.g., Fireball) with a
range of 300', or they can use a dispersed cone (base 100') with
a range of 100' that is the equivalent of a ball attack (e.g.,
Fireball). Their attack bonus varies with the creature. (When
unspecified use a bonus equal to 1.5x the creature's level.)

Dragons are enchanted beasts. Magic flows through their
caustic blood, and many Drakes are powerful spell-casters. Some
utilize their skills to crush their foes, while others wield enchantments in more subtle ways. All Dragons bask in power and enjoy
dominating other creatures, and many know an array of potent
mind-manipulation spells. Coupled with their sharp intellect,
these incantations can drive a stalwart Man or Elf to lay down his
arms or even wage war upon his brethren.
The Dragons' fondness for word-games, riddles, and other
contests of the mind is legendary. All Drakes enjoy using their
intellectual prowess. Puzzles and riddles fascinate them. They are
skilled in myriad tongues and capable of conversing and worddueling in many languages. Their wicked eyes, audacious presence, incredible vocal-strength, and perceptive ways make them
formidable (if not overwhelming) foes in a debate. Schooled in the
arts of verbal illusion and capable of sensing the slightest changes
in sound pitch and emotion, they see deep into the words of those
who are unfortunate enough to meet them. Few can conceal their
true feelings in the face of such utter power.
Dragons, however, have certain weaknesses when it comes to
battles of logic or wit. Vain, wrathful, deceitful, self-centered, and
astoundingly boastful. Drakes have a very delicate temper. Filled
with hubris and easily flattered, they bask in others' adoration and
enjoy complements even when they know the speaker is simply
hoping to delay his own doom. A Dragon will toy with a foe whose
soothing words are effectively delivered far longer than he will
tolerate a pugnacious adversary. To a Drake, a false flatterer is
wise and an armed challenger is simply foolhardy fodder. Dragons
despise disrespect.

Regardless of their species, Dragons live and hunt alone. They
jealously guard their territories, and will confront or kill other
Drakes that infringe on their ever-expanding domains. Their
realms, of course, reflect their origins, for wherever a Dragon goes,
he lays waste to the land. They do not concern themselves with
subjects or the works of lesser creatures; they seek only power and
the booty that testifies to their triumphs.
All Dragons live in lairs of some form, returning in a way to the
womb-like earth from which they came. They spend an inordinate
amount of time in these underground (or underwater) abodes,
reclining on beds of treasure. Even when active, they rest or sleep
for ten to a hundred hours on end. During hibernation, a Dragon
might sleep for a thousand years. Many a Drake has slept so long
that chunks of his treasure become imbedded in his armored scales.
Dragons can mate but, like other monsters, they have no inclination to form unions or reproduce. Only an outside will can
compel them to produce offspring. In a sense, then, Drakes must
be bred.
When Dragons do mate, they follow elaborate courtship rituals.
Males make the invariably long journey to their mate's home,
where he combats any rivals or pretenders. He subsequently
engages in dance, a stormy but acrobatic display of frightening
frenzy. Mating follows and may last as long as ten days. The male
then departs for 10-100 years. Six months or so later the female
lays 1-10 eggs in a hatchery pit deep w i t h i n the earth. After another
six months pass, the newly-developed young use their sharp horns
to break out of their tough, leathery shells and begin their lives in
Arda. Those that are perceived to be weak, however, are eaten by
their mothers.

While each Drake is unique, of course, they all share
certain common elements. They are all v i r t u a l l y immortal
creatures with formidable individual strength. As shown in
the stories surrounding Glaurung, Ancalagon, Scatha, and
Smaug. they feared no single individual from the ranks of
Middle-earth's Free Peoples. No other monsters, save the
renegade Maia known as the Balrogs, rival them. Still,
Dragons are vain, deceitful, ireful, and ruthless, making
them predictable and incapable of adapting to certain critical
challenges.
The general powers common to all Dragons follow:

48

Drakes subsist on virtually any kind of food. They can consume
anything from meat to mithril, swallowing as much as a thousand
pounds in a single gulp. When they feed, it is often in the form of
an unbroken orgy of consumption lasting two to forty days. During
this time, they slaughter and eat herds of cattle or wild Lassanakûni. Their unusual metabolism enables them to store most of
this food and allows them to hibernate with impunity.
Virtually immortal. Dragons have never been known to die of
old age or disease. They grow and age though, getting larger and
in many cases slower with the passing years. Their enchanted
blood gets increasingly caustic and corrosive, w h i l e their armor
gets thicker and tougher and their horns get longer and more
heavily ribbed. In time, a Drake's overlapping scales become
almost impenetrable, and even their relatively soft underside
becomes capable of deflecting all the best of weapons.
However, Drakes have a flaw in their defenses. Known as a
"birth spot," it is an imperfection of unknown origin or purpose
which some chroniclers attribute to the wrath of Eru. Here, scales
fail to develop. With the exception of the Dragon's eyes, it is the
only vulnerable point on the creature's body. It found by a lucky
opponent (e.g. Bard the Bowman), this flaw can spell the Drake's
doom.
Of course, just getting close to a Dragon is a considerable feat.
Dragons have gigantic, multi-rowed teeth and claws as hard and
sharp as a lance-head. Some have whip-like tails that can bash or
slash an opponent to death in a single, precise sweep. Others have
huge bat-like wings that can stir the air into a spout or drive it into
a galing wind. Those that possess breath weapons, like the
fearsome Fire-drakes, can use this wind to enhance the strength
and speed of their flames — flames that can scour a whole valley
in minutes.
The Dragon's horns are special tools used for boring and
dueling. Their size and rib pattern symbolizes a Drake's power and
denotes his stature in the hierachy of the species. These horns are
essentially unbreakable. Prized for their value a musical instruments and bow-making material, they can be ground to produce a
host of enchanted potions. In a strange way, they embody the
strength and magic of these exceptionally special creatures.

6.31 CAVE DRAKES
Cave Drakes (Q. "Rondolóki"; sing. "Rondolóke") are relatively small Dragons who evolved very early and never developed
refined intelligence. Descendants of the earliest Cold-drakes, they
are an exceedingly ancient race that relies on instincts rather than
plots. Cave Drakes live alone, and generally fight each other to the
death. They rarely pose a threat to the stability of Endorian politics.

Monster Glossary: Dragons

CAVE DRAKES: all-UV,EL-7; 15-40ft
True Cave Drakes resemble diminutive Cold-drakes. They have
no wings; nor do they possess a breath weapon. Cave Drakes rely
on their short, powerful legs and muscular bodies when hunting
prey near their cavernous, highland homes. Denizens of caves and
volcanos, they are quarrelsome and territorial and terrified of the
true Dragons, although they will deny it vehemently and will "drop
names," claiming to know old Scatha (or whomever is the nearest
Great Drake) well. While able to speak, they remain stupid by the
standards of Great Drakes and cherish polished glass over uncut
gems, since the former gleams so brightly. They are appalling liars
(both in quality and quantity).
CAVE WORMS: t-UV,EL-8; 24-36ft
Cave Worms are the most specialized and repellent breed of
Cave Drakes. They lack any noticeable limbs and live their whole
lives underground. Like most cave creatures, they have little
pigmentation and even less eyesight, relying on the ability to
"read" vibrations and a good sense of smell to locate the prey that
they seize with their prehensile tongues. Because they have a
constant need for calcium, the favorite food of Cave Worms is
bones.
Cave Worms combine most of the least desirable characteristics
of worms, being constantly covered with slimy mucous. They will
eat almost anything, meat being a favorite, but roots and fungus are
quite acceptable in a pinch. They do not, however, eat rock, despite
persistent Dwarvish legends to the contrary. Rather, they use the
six hard horns on their bony heads as drill bits to bore their way
through soft or crumbling stone, sliding along on their mucous as
they go. A bony ridge protects their jaws and narrow eyes from this
boring activity.
Cave Worms dwell in the Underdeeps. Thus, they are most
common in Moria, although they may be encountered in other
spots where someone has been foolish enough to dig too far
beneath the earth.

6.32 COLD-DRAKES
Cold-drakes (Q. "Helkaloki"; sing. "Helkaloke") comprise the
most common and oldest breed of Dragon. All other Dragons are
descended from their line. Bred by Morgoth as the ultimate
fighting creatures, they were the first monsters to threaten the
peace of Middle-earth.
There are four types of Cold-drakes, Winged Cold-drakes and
three wingless varieties: true Cold-drakes, Ice-drakes, and their
smaller cousins, the Land Drakes.

49

Monster Glossary: Dragons
COLD-DRAKES: ktcf-ABFGMUVW,CHPT,EKLK-8;
30-80 ft (wingless)
True Cold-drakes are powerful, armored creatures whose scales
are thicker than those of other Dragons. Agile but wingless, they
have powerful limbs and long, steely claws. A Cold-drake's bite
can crush a fully-armored foe, and a sweep of its whip-like tail can
easily fell a Mûmak. They relish physical combat and are quick to
strike when confronted. Cold-drakes enjoy the hunt, but they love
the fight.
Most Cold-drakes live in cold or frigid climes, preferring the
wastes and alpine highlands to more temperate lands. These monsters were, after all, spawned in the uttercold of the Farthest North.
Thus, they are stout, strong, immune to icy weather, and capable
of smelling prey up to ten miles away. (No Dragon possesses as
great a sense of smell.) Their coloring also reflects their affinity for
the snows. Although they vary in hue like other Dragons, most are
grey-white or even white in color. Still, the older, more powerful.
Cold-drakes are often black, brown, or even red.
Agburanar. Agburanar is a black Cold-drake who resides at
Caves of Ûlund in spur of Grey Mountains tens miles north of the
Withered Heath of the eastern Grey Mountains (S. "Ered Mithrin"). Although he slew the Dwarf-lord Fain and later s l a u g h tered a small band of Snow-trolls who challenged h i m for Fáin's
hoard, he is a relatively shy beast who favors Goal and Bear
meat.
Ando-Anca. A red Drake, Ando-Anca resides at Mount
Udûnanca on the northeastern side of the Withered Heath. His
father was Glaurung, so he is extremely old and, aside from his
older brother Scatha, the most powerful of the Cold-drakes of the
Grey Mountains. Ando-Anca is an aggressive but sleepy creature who, even when stirred, sleeps 95% of the time (01-95).
When he is awake, he hunts Losrandír, but his favorite prey are
Trolls (for he loves a good fight).
Culgor. Reddish-gold, Culgor is one of the most beautiful of
Morgoth's Cold-drakes. The fastest and most inquisitive of the
Grey Mountain Dragons, he lives at Bat Dome.
Gostir. Gostir, the ancient "Dread-glance," is a powerful enchanter who resides in the mountains of Barl Syrnac north of
Rhûn. He is a pure white Cold-drake renowned for his burning
red eyes and terrifying countenance. Gostir can frighten a foe to
submission or even death with his gaze. Fortunately for the local
Lossoth, Umli, and Lotan peoples, however, he feeds mostly on
herd animals and large water mammals.
Haurnfile. The older (and meaner) sister of Culgor, Haurnfile
lives in the Underdeeps below Bat Dome in the southwestern
comer of the Withered Heath. She hates her brother, who reputedly stole her hoard before fleeing from the Blue Mountains
overlooking Beleriand. Haurnfile is a reddish-grey Cold-drake
that hunts Dwarves but generally subsists on Goats and Sheep.
Hyarleuca. Astoundingly lazy and given to foul habits, Hyarleuca
is a young brown Cold-drake. Noted as the least subtle of the
Grey Mountain Dragons, he often hunts in the open grasslands
between the Grey Mountains and the Iron Hills. He lives
southeast of Gondmaeglom, ten miles north of the Men Rhûnen.
Klyaxar. Klyaxar is a brownish-red Cold-drake who has long
haunted the Lossoth of the Far North. Young and small but
quick, he roams the hill country north of the Ered Mithrin.
Lamthanc. Lamthanc means "Forked-tongue," which is an apt
title for this huge grey-white Cold-drake. Not only is his
prehensile, nine foot tongue forked, but he is a deceptive

schemer. Lamthanc disdains truths, preferring to employ complex lies to confuse and trap his foes. He is, in every sense, a
playful killer. A resident of the Iron Mountains, he lives near the
icy waters of the Sea of Illuin, by the Bay of Utûm in northcentral Endor. His only rival for power in the region has been
Hoarmûrath of Dír, the King of Urd (and later a Ringwraith).
Lastalaika. Lastalaika, the "Sharp-ears," is a silvery-white Colddrake who resides in the northern Orocarni (Q. "Red Mountains") of the East. His lair looks wetward over the Aigvalg
territory. Known as a frequently dormant but ruthless maneater, Lastalaika has devastated a wide portion of the grasslands
near his home.
Merkampa. The so-called "Wild-claw" resides in the Ered Ormal
of south-central Middle-earth. A light grey Cold-drake who has
long terrorized the Clyan and Vaag peoples, he is often called the
Bane of the South. Merkampa's awakening has spurred numerous tribes to move out of the lands surrounding the Chy Passes.
Scatha the Worm. Scatha, the youngest son of the first brood of
Glaurung, resides at Gondmaeglom in the central Grey Mountains. Undoubtedly one of the mightiest of the Cold-drakes, he
is the bane of the Dwarves of the Ered Mithrin.
An extremely aggressive and greedy Drake, Scatha actively
hunts for civilized strongholds containing loot and he frequently
raids caravans traveling along the Men Rhûnen (S. "Eastern
Way") north of Mirkwood. He eats Losrandír, Goats, Orcs, and
Giants.

SCATHA'S TALE
One of the greatest Dragons to survive the destruction of
Angband, Scatha the Worm roamed Endor's northern
wastes throughout the Second Age. As the eldest surviving
offspring of Glaurung, he was the preeminent Cold-drake in
the North. He later made his lair in the Grey Mountains,
where he awoke around T.A. 1625. Scatha considered
himself the lord of the range when the Dwarves of Durin's
Tribe began mining in the region in T.A. 1999.
Scatha slew a number of the Naugrim and built quite a
treasure-hoard prior to the arrival of Durin's Folk. However,
when the wealthy Dwarves from Erebor (the Lonely Mountain) entered the Ered Mithrin, he struck quickly. The Great
Cold-drake remembered his father's defeat at the hands of
the Dwarves of Belegost and feared that the stalwart intruders would claim his domain. So, in early T.A. 2000, the foul
Worm attacked the Dwarven mine at Silverplunge, where he
killed the inhabitants and captured a vast cache of treasure.
The Dwarves sought to avenge this strike, but they took
too long to regroup. Later the same year, Lord Fram of the
Éothéod slew Scatha and took the Cold-drake's hoard back
to the Northman realm in the Anduin Vales. Enraged, the
Dwarves demanded that the Éothéod return the booty, but
Fram refused. The Horse-lord preferred to use his newfound wealth to build a new capital at Framsburg. He then
sent the Naugrim an i n s u l t i n g reply, along with a necklace
made from Scatha's teeth. This touched off fighting and the
Dwarves slew Fram during the brief conflict. Ever since,
there has been animosity between the Northmen and the
Naugrim — the awful legacy of Scatha the Worm.

Monster Glossary: Dragons

50

Bairanax. A Bear-hunter, Bairanax lives in the caves at Ovir
Hollow in the southern Grey Mountains. He is a brownish-red
Drake measuring about 55' in length. His fondness for Bearmeat is tied to his hatred for Bears, for as a young Dragon
escaping the doom of Angband, he was almost killed by a North
Bear. In turn, the Northman Bear-cults consider Bairanax to be
an ancient and very personal enemy. More than one of the
Beijabar (Beornings) has perished while trying to slay him.
Bairanax hunts in the cool river valleys of the North, where he
stalks Bears intent on eating berries and fishing.
Daelomin. A highly mystical and enchanted Drake, Daelomin is
often referred to in First Age legend as the Ghost-wing of the
Ered Engrin. Her lair is situated at the Dancing Spire, a little over
40 miles west of the Withered Heath and halfway between
Gondmaeglom and Anvilmount.
Dynca. Ugly yet compassionate, Dynca is the most passive and
forgiving of Cold-drakes of the Grey Mountains. He lives at
Sorrowdrop and prefers to hunt in the Northern Wastes.
Khuzadrepa. Khuzadrepa is a powerful sorcerer. His ability to
manipulate the forces of Nature is legendary. A vile monster, he
enjoys overt displays of power and ruthlessly slays the strong
and weak alike. Khuzadrepa lives at Thunder Cleft in the Grey
Mountains, a Dwarf-hold he seized around T.A. 2050.
ICE-DRAKES: cf-FGOSW,T,EKLR-8; 25-65 ft (wingless)
Ice-drakes resemble white Cold-drakes and often confused with
their kin. Unlike true Cold-drakes, however, these creatures often
feed on water creatures and are among Endor's most powerful
swimmers. Ice-drakes are also capable of ingesting water or ice
and spewing it as a sort of "false breath weapon."
Although they share most characteristics of other Cold-drakes,
Ice-drakes reside exclusively in crevasses or ice-caves and spend
most of their active lives on or near glaciers and ice flows. They
are capable of glacading, essentially skiing on their powerful, flat
afterclaws (i.e., claws that extend out the rear of each appendage).
Lomaw. Lomaw is a grey-white Ice-drake who lives in a snowcave just south of the Dying Glacier in the Grey Mountains. He
is one of only two Ice-drakes in the region. Extremely agile,
clever, and capable of freezing toes within 600 feet, he is among
the most deadly of the Dragons of the North.
Nimanaur. Like his older brother Lomaw, N i n a n a u r is an Icedrake who lives in the Grey Mountains, far afield from his k i n ,
most of whom reside near the northern seas. He is less deadly
than Lomaw and prefers to feed on the Losrandir who wander
near his abode at the northwestern edge of the Withered Heath.
LAND DRAKES: ktcf-ABFGMUVW,CHPT,EKLR-8;
25-50 ft (wingless)
Land Drakes are basically small Cold-drakes or large Lesser
Drakes. They are notable for their speed and their ability to leap
and climb like a huge cat. Quick to startle or anger, they are among
the most common of all Worms.
WINGED COLD-DRAKES: ktcf-ABFGMUVW, CHPT,EKLR8; 30-80 ft (50-120 ft wingspan)
Winged Cold-drakes are, like Fire-drakes, the descendants of
true Cold-drakes. They resemble their forefathers in character,
except that they are more slender and graceful. Most importantly,
the elongated fingers of their long forelimbs support huge membranes — wings which enable them to fly.

6.33 FIRE-DRAKES
Fire-drakes (Q. "Urulóki" or "Fealóki"; sing. "Urulóke" or
"Fealóke") are the most powerful Dragons in Endor. Descendants
of Glaurung the Father, the Worm of Morgoth, this frighteningly
destructive breed is also the second oldest Dragon subgroup.
FlRE-DRAKES: (all)-ABFGMUVW,CHPT,EKLR-8; 30-90 ft.
50-140 ft wingspan (when winged)
Fire-drakes come in many forms, but most are slen-der, agile
creatures. While some are suited to the land and others to the air
(they are all poor swimmers), few are as stout or strong as the Colddrakes. They possess a fiery breath and a host of wicked spells.

DRAGONS OF THE WITHERED HEATH
The Withered Heath north of Mirkwood is home to many
Dragons. Most of them are not mighty as Dragons go, yet
from the point of view of a Man, Elf, or Dwarf they are still
not to be trifled with. They steal treasure from each other and
from any other sources that they hear about. Their hoards are
of varying sizes and qualities, for not all of them are very
clever about the quality of jewelry or weapons. Smaug and
Scatha were, in their time, the mightiest of these Worms.
When they departed (and later died), Itangast and AndoAnca became the preeminent threats.
Like all Dragons, Fire-drakes are capable of dominating (e.g.,
hypnotizing or enchanting) other beings with their eyes and voices.
They can also move their wings in order to appear larger and more
imposing, or to simply distract their prey. Their keen eyes also
enable them to operate effectively in virtually any lighting. Given
this acute sight and their prodigous memories, Fire-drakes have
little trouble keeping careful track of their hoards.
Ancalagon the Black. The defender and destroyer of Thangorodrim, the mighty "Rushing-jaws" was the greatest monster ever
born in Middle-earth. He was the epitome of Fire-drakes and

Monster Glossary: Dragons
the father of Winged Worms. Hundreds of feet long and
possessing a fiery breath capable of destroying an entire forest
in a single blast, Ancalagon could drive away an army or slay
whole tribes unaided. His spells rivalled those of the Maiar and
his visage invoked a terror surpassing that of a Balrog.
Fortunately, Ancalagon was killed by Eärendil during the
Great Battle. A lucky and skillful bowshot saved Endor from
a creature unrivalled in the annals of history. Ancalagon was so
huge that, when he fell, he shattered his the Black Enemy's
fortress beyond repair (see above).
Angurth. Angurth is a long, black-gold Dragon who is missing a
horn as a result of an ancient mating duel. He resides at Long
Peak in the Withered Heath area of the Grey Mountains. Known
for his extremely strong jaws and the intense heat of his fiery
breath, Angurth reputedly relishes duels and enjoys slaying
heavily armored foes. Save that of Smaug, he has the most
powerful breath weapon of any of the Fire-drakes in the Grey
Mountains.
Glaurung, Father of Dragons. Claiming was the first Fire-drake.
He was, like Ancalagon, a huge beast. Glaurung measured
almost three hundred feet in length when he was full grown.
Morgoth's secret weapon in the war against the Elves, he was
extremely successful, inspiring his creator to make more and
even better Dragons. Brilliant but cruel, vain, and exceedingly
rash. Glaurung destroyed many significant Elven and Mannish
strongholds and ravished many landscapes before dying at the
hands of Túrin Turambar.
Itangast. Itangast is the deadliest and smartest of the unwinged
Fire-drakes in the Grey Mountains. He is quick and stealthy but
huge, measuring ninety feet in length. Known for his beautiful
blue-tipped black scales and long, silvery horns, he has a
disarmingly beautiful guise. His name aptly describes his
nature, for Itangast means "Guest-eater" in the Northman
tongues of Rhovanion. He keeps his abode at Gold Hill in the
middle of a dry lake in the Heath's southeastern lowlands.
Leucaruth. Leucaruth, the "Worm of Ire," is a red Dragon who is
known for her unwavering hatred for Dwarves. Exceptionally
fierce, she is perpetually angry and constantly hunting. She is
rarely (01-20) at her lair in Irerock above Wolf Flat, a huge
multistoried cavern-maze located ten miles north of the northern
rim of the Heath.
Ruingurth. Ruingurth means "Fire-death," an appropriate name
for this ugly but dangerous reddish-brown Dragon. He is the
oldest and slowest of Wilderland's Great Worms, but his firebreath rivals that of his strongest kin. The son of Ancalagon, he
fought in the War of Wrath, where he was wounded by a Great
Eagle. Virtually in perpetual sleep (01-92), Ruingurth is uncaringly fatalistic. He will not stir unless struck. His home is in
Goat Mountain, a silver-laden peak located along the southern
rim of the Withered Heath.
Smaug the Golden. Smaug is greatest and most cunning of the
Grey Mountain Dragons. He was slow to anger but exceptionally pitiless, spiteful, wrathful, and proud. Although red, his
scales have a golden undertone which reflects light like metal. In
the sunlight or bright moonlight, Smaug appears to be gold in
color; thus his name. He is ninety feet long and has a wingspan
of one hundred and fifty feet, which is unusually large for a Firedrake of the Third Age. Smaug originally resided in the Barl
Syrnac, but he moved to Anvilmount, northwest of the Withered
Heath, when he discovered that Dwarves had uncovered mineral
wealth in region.

51

SMAUG'S TALE
Scourge of the Lonely Mountain, Smaug the Golden was
one of the greatest Dragons to survive the cataclysm that
destroyed Morgoth's kingdom at the end of the First Age. He
was, like Scatha, an ancient Drake who dominated his rivals.
Smaug settled at Anvilmount in the Grey Mountains
sometime before T. A. 1600. There he found a vast delving
which had once been (ca. First Age) an Adan holy place. In
keeping with his nature, Smaug defiled the tombs and took
the modest treasure for his hoard. He was upset with the lack
of wealth and decimated much of the surrounding countryside in a fit of rage.
When the tale of the wealth of the Dwarves of Erebor (S.
"Lonely Mountain") came to his sharp ears in T.A. 2770,
Smaug decided that this great treasure should be his. He flew
southward across the Withered Heath and over the grasslands of northern Rhovanion. When he came to Erebor, he
surprised his prey, and those that were caught within the
mount were slaughtered. The rest of the Dwarves, who were
led by King Thrór, fled eastward to the Iron Hills. Circling
the isolated mountain, the pitiless Drake then swept down on
Dale and burned the town that stood near the base of the
peak. Only a few of the Northman residents survived. They
escaped southward to Esgaroth on the Long Lake (Laketown).
Smaug ruled under the Mount for two centuries, occasionally stirring to destroy pan of the surrounding countryside.
He extended his wasteland domain as far as the Long Lake
and the Long Marshes. The Dragon gathered his treasure —
which included the entire wealth of Thrór's people — into an
awesome pile, upon which he rested.
In T.A. 2941 , Thorin Oakenshield brought his company of
Dwarves (and a Hobbit) out of the West to challenge the
great Drake. Thorin's compatriot, Bilbo Baggins, disturbed
the Dragon. In the process, the vain beast revealed his birthspot, the one flaw in his armor. This proved to be his
undoing. When he subsequently arose to kill Thorin's
Dwarves and destroy the town of Esgaroth that had harbored
and helped them, one of the townsmen was ready to exploit
Smaug's secret. As he flew vengefully over the Long Lake
and began burning the settlement. Bard the Bowman (the
rightful heir to the throne of the then-ruined town of Dale)
shot and killed the Dragon. Thus, Bard avenged the destruction of Dale and ended the reign of the mightiest Dragon in
the North.
Throkmaw. Bane of the Northern Waste, Throkmaw the Black is
the mightiest winged Dragon, save Smaug, in a]l the Grey
Mountains. Like Smaug, he is the son of Ancalagon and inherited much of his father's strength. Fortunately for the Free
Peoples of Rhovanion, though, Throkmaw never ventures south
of the peaks. Instead, he confines himself to rare flights into the
northern wastes, where he hunts Trolls and Lossoth. His lair is
situated beneath the Shab Arch, in the northern foothills of the
range, about 20 miles northeast of Scatha's home in Gondmaeglom.
Uruial. Uruial is an extremely old but stunted red Dragon. He was
crippled during the Elder Days by an Noldo archer and was the
last Dragon to escape the downfall of Angband. He now rests in
his spectacular lair at Steel Fell in the middle of the southwestern
spur of the Ered Mithrin.

Monster Glossary: Dragons

52

Utumkodur. Also known as Kod Ultor, Utumkodur is the only
truly golden Dragon to survive the First Age. She is the elder
sister of Smaug, and rivals her brother in size and strength.
Unlike Smaug (or for that matter any Dragon), however, she was
never ireful.

UTUMKODUR'S TALE
When Angband was destroyed, Utumkodur had already
begun flying to the east, for Morgoth resolved that she
should subjugate the Avari. Morgoth's defeat left her
mission without any underlying purpose. Nonetheless, she
settled in the high peaks of Orocarni, in the east of Middleearth, as the Second Age dawned. There she became
mysteriously enamored of the Hildor of the region, going so
far as to befriend them and begin teaching them.
Utumkodur's strange relationship with the tribes of Kael
indirectly gave birth to the unification of the Avaradan
people known as the Womaw. This race would dominate the
politics of northeastern Middle-earth for much of the next
two Ages. The Cult of the Dragon that formed the core of
Womaw mysticism was based on Kod Ultor's (as she was
known to the Men of the East) teachings. Her adherents, the
Dragon-lords, produced the line of Kings that ruled the evergrowing domain of Womawas Drus and became overlords
of a huge empire. These Kings, or "Hionvora" (Wm.
"Emperors") practiced Utomkodur's illusionary magic,
becoming powerful Word-mages. (A later member of this
line. Komûl I. became the Nazgûl Khamûl.)
Kod Ultor perished at the hands of an evil Avar Elf-queen
named Mormiresûl (who used Utomkodur's scales to make
a magnificent suit of armor). The Golden Dragon's peculiar
legacy, however, survived, since she was diefied by the
Womaw.
MARSH-DRAKES: (all)-FMS,CHP,EKlLR-8 :
20-50 FT. 35-80ft wingspan
Marsh-drakes are small Fire-drakes who are capable of breathing flaming gases. Being marsh creatures however, they rarely
ignite their breath. Their gaseous breath is extremely toxic and acts
like dilluted Dragon-blood — poisoning or acidifying their prey.

6.34 WATER DRAKES
Like Cave Drakes, Water Drakes (Q. "Nénilóki"; sing.
"Nénilóki") are air-breathing Dragons who have adapted to a
wholly new environment. They have long, gracile bodies, tightlyfitted scales, and fin-like spinal crests and appendages, enabling
them to cut through water like Eels or Sea Snakes. Their multichambered lungs permit them to stay under water for periods of up
to an hour, while their long throats provide them the means to store
enough water to spew out devastating blasts of spray. These Water
Serpents live in freshwater pools or in waterline lairs situated on
remote islands or seacoasts. Exceedingly rare, most reside in the
subterranean meres of the eerie Underdeeps.
RAIN-DRAKES: all-FMUV,ELX-7; 20-40ft
Rain-drakes (Q. "Aelinilóki"; sing. "Aelinilóke"; aka "Lakeworms" or "Pool-creatures"; P. "Cidimbu Dubanavi"; sing.
"Cidimbu Dubana") are related to the true Water-drakes found in
the seas or the caves and caverns deep beneath Endor. They are less

refined than their kin, however, since Rain-drakes spend a good
deal of time in shallows or along the shore and are capable of
moving (albeit slowly) on land. Living in the lakes and deeper,
remoter rivers, all Rain-drakes dwell in fresh water. Most construct lairs in submarine caves, although a few make huge nests out
of fallen trees, rocks, and other natural debris. Dark blue and black,
they have four, long, nimble, claw-tipped fins and huge jaws that
bristle with four rows of four inch long teeth.
WATER-DRAKES: all-FMOUV,ELX-7; 30-70ft
True Water-drakes are often referred to as Sea Serpents (Q.
"Lingwilóki";sing."Lingwilóke"). There are both freshwater and
saltwater varieties and these hideous monsters can be found
wherever the water is dark and deep. Most are deep blue or sea
green in color and hard to see, particularly in the darkness. These
creatures fear bright sunlight or fierce, unquenchable fires, so they
rarely venture into shallows — particularly during the day. (A host
of torches might cause a Water-drake to flee.)
All Water-drakes are agile swimmers who are capable of moving at speeds of up to twenty knots (about twenty-one miles per
hour). They move almost silently and can squeeze through very
small passages in reefs or cavern systems. Using its keen senses,
including a sonar-like organ like that found in porpoises, it can
locate its prey under the worst conditions. Then it strikes with a
burst of speed, as well as an uncanny sense of precision.
After successfully stalking a potential victim, the Water-drake
can seize it with its six fin-claws or stun it with a blast of expelled
water (treated as a waterbolt). Should either of these methods fail
to make the victim tractable, the Water-drake can then try an attack
with its large mouthful of multirowed, four-inch teeth. It uses these
to crush its prey into flexibility and then swallows it more or less
whole. A larger victim might call for even more forceful methods:
the long head and tail of the Water-drake make an effective whip
or noose. (A larger Sea Serpent can even grapple and crush a small
ship.)
Aside from the aforementioned fear of fire, the Water-drake's
one weakness is its dislike of the disorienting effects of a stunning
blow. Such an injury may cause the monster to flee.

6.35 WERE-WORMS
Were-worms are Dragons imbued with the power to change
their form. They are shape-changers. There are two breeds of
Were-worms: Sand Drakes and true Were-worms.
SAND DRAKES: nas-BUV,ELR-8; 15-25ft
The Sand Drake is a winged creature that lives in arid or semiarid locales and roosts in lowland lairs that are little more than
sheltered nests. They frequent the skies of Harad, but a few live on
the drier parts of plains between the Ered Ormal and the mountains
of the East. The Haradrim call them the "Zimaj." and fear these
small Drakes more than any other desert denizen.
The Sand Drakes of Harad roost deep in the sandy wilds of the
Dune Sea, although they hunt along trade routes and near oases and
other civilized areas. They are solitary creatures and fight one
another almost as readily as they battle Desert Eagles (see Orao in
Section 5.1). Their homes are usually a simple burrow in the loose
sand. After digging in in the early evening, they return to the
surface with first light. On occasion, though, a Sand Drake will
establish a more permanent lair among the stones of a scattered
desert ruin.

Monster Glossary: Dragons & Flying Ministers
Sand Drakes resemble the Winged-drakes that terrorize other
regions of Middle-earth. However, they are much smaller and
swifter and share many characteristics with the larger birds of prey.
Their teeth and claws are unusually sharp and disproportionately
large, given their size, so they create quite a danger despite their
inability to wield spells or breath fire. Sand Drakes have one
undeniable weakness, however: they are hardly more intelligent
than the snakes and lizards that share their land. These creatures
live by their appetites and instincts alone.
Like true Were-worms, though, Sand-drakes can magically
alter their shape. They can nestle atop or beside a natural feature
or some dead prey and take on the characteristics of the object they
touch. In this, they function more like Cameleons t h a n true Wereworms. since the latter consciously change their form.
Insatiably hungry, they are the most active of all terrestrial
Drakes. Once on the attack, a Sand Drake will viciously and
tenaciously pursue its prey until either the foe or the Dragon is cloud
or incapable of further combat. They attack from the air, using
their powerful jaws and the talons of their muscular h i n d legs.
Their speed and agility is such that even one Sand Drake is enough
to cause great damage to a poorly guarded caravan.
WERE-WORMS: nwmsk-ABFUV,CDHPT,EL-9; 40-70 ft
True Were-worms are formidable monsters. Wingless, they
resemble Cold-drakes, except that they are long and very slender
and are usually reddish brown or green. Like Cold-drakes, they are
powerful spell-casters; however, Were-worms concentrate on
their ability to magically alter their form. As powerful shapechangers, they can elude, bewilder, surprise, terrify, or simply
overwhelm their foes. A Were-worm can reduce or increase its
size by as much as fifty percent of its mass, assuming any form it
can actually see (or envision in detail) at the time it alters its shape.
Most Were-worms live in the highlands of eastern Middle-earth.
Their greatest concentration is in the Mountains of the Wind (Q.
"Orosúli"; S. "Ered Gwaen") in southeastern Endor, but a few live
in the Red Mountains (Q. "Orocarni"; S. "Ered Ceren") to the
north. They favor mist-shrouded lairs, which may account for the
legends that say Were-worms live in the clouds. Oddly, Hobbit
tales confuse true Were-worms and Sand Drakes, for only the latter
are found in real desert terrain.

6.4 FLYING MONSTERS
Morgoth quickly realized that flying creatures could serve him
in many ways. Thus, he developed do/ens of breeds of aerial
monsters. Some served him as scouts, others as messengers, and
others as aerial warriors. Some simply acted as mobile clouds,
obscuring the sunlight to create a false night that favored the Black
Enemy's armies.
CREBAIN: wmkt-ABFM,CDHP,EQRX-5; 5ft wingspan
Large black crows with evil natures, Crebain (sing. "Craban")
have often been servants of evil. They are primarily carrion eaters,
and they are not picky about how long their meals have been dead
or even about whether they are truly dead yet. They will also mob
injured creatures and, if under instructions from some evil i n t e l l i gence, uninjured individuals travelling alone or lost. Keen-sighted
and attracted by shining or brightly-colored objects, they make
excellent spies. They are most common on south-central Middleearth, including Fangorn and Dunland, but may be found elsewhere, especially near centers of evil.

53

FELL BEASTS: all-ABGUVWZ,CDHJPT,EKL-8;
15-25 ft (body). 30-40 ft (wingspan)
Small, Dragon-related monsters. Fell Beasts are horrible and
terrifying creatures bred from Winged-drakes. Sauron found them
roosting in the remote highlands of the North and refined them in
order to produce swift, aerial steeds for his Nazgûl
The Fell Beast most resembles a huge, featherless bird, but its
skin is tough and leathery. Its wings are membranes stretched on
bone, like those of the bat. It stinks of rotting carrion, its favorite
food, and its body is so foul that its blood and excrement pollutes
or k i l l s even the hardiest of plants. When the body of the Fell Beast
of the Witch-king of Angmar was burned in T.A. 3019, the smoke
and ashes destroyed the underlying ground, preventing even the
smallest blade of grass or the rankest of weeds from growing on the
spot ever again.
Exceptionally useful to evil beings in need of strong and fearless
steeds, Fell Beasts are strong fliers and mighty warriors.
The Fell Beast of the Witch-king of Angmar. This was likely the
mightiest of its kind. Its master rode it to the battle of the
Pellenor Fields, where it leapt upon Snowmane, Théoden's
steed. It almost tore the Rohir King and his to pieces, but Éowyn
Edmund's-Daughter, Théoden's niece intervened. She killed
the beast with one blow before being stunned by its master, the
Lord of the Nazgûl.
Durclax, Fell Beast of the Court of Ardor. The steed of the evil
Sorceress Rilia, Durclax was a gift from Sauron. The Fell Beast
was trained to bear none but Rilia and her underling Momaur,
the Lord of Staves. Durclax is kept in Rilia's fortress at
Naurlindol, in southernmost Middle-earth.

6.5 GIANT RACES
Morgoth produced the Giant races in an attempt mock Eru's
handiwork and combat the powerful Onodrim (Ents). The Black
Enemy failed to refine these creatures, so generally the older and
larger breeds are the least intelligent.

6.51 GIANTS: f-AV,HT-6; 10-12 ft tall
While not particularly numerous, Giants (Q. "Norsar"; sing.
"Norsa") inhabit the alpine regions of virtually every mountain
range in Middle-earth. They are wild, playful, and dim-witted
creatures who favor cool, desolate areas little frequented by the
Free Peoples. Giants eat large quantities of meat and they hunt
their prey in a number of different ways. A Norsa can run his
victims down and strangle them, or (in the case of a skillful Giant)
he can fell the beast by throwing large rocks and crush the
creature's skull, leg, or spine.
Giants have little use for conventional items of treasure. They
do not use money and are much too large to use most weapons
(although many of them can grasp the idea of what a weapon is).
Norsar don't bother with personal adornments, except (in some
cases) for trophies. Some Giants, for instance, make necklaces of
skulls strung on hide cords.
Like Trolls, though, a few Giants, fascinated by the glitter of
armor and such objects, may accumulate a hoard of miscellaneous
shiny objects. There are always exceptions. The Red Giants of the
Orocarni, for instance, even know how use and make weapons.

54

Monster Glossary: Giant Rates & Pûkel-creatures

6.52 TROLLS
NOTE: See ICE's Lords of Middle-earth ,Volume III for
more information about Trolls.
Trolls (S. "Tereg"; sing "Torog"; Q. "Ologi"; sing. "Olog") are
often mistaken as small Giants. These huge and foul creatures are
the handiwork of Morgoth, who developed them in mockery of
Ents. Trolls vary immensely in abilities and intelligence. Some
early versions were obviously let loose to plague Arda at the dawn
of Morgoth's ravages. These are the so-called "Wild Trolls."
Others, notably the Black Trolls or "Olog-hai," were refined by the
Black Enemy and his apt pupil Sauron and possessed a high degree
of intelligence.
NOTE: A persistent myth about Trolls of all sorts must be
quashed here: no Troll of any kind regenerates from bits of
flesh. It is true that Trolls are very hard to kill, and as long
as they have any life in them whatsoever, they will fight or
recover. Some even regenerate missing limbs, although this
takes a long time. Yet as long as a Troll's conqueror is certain
that the creature is well and truly dead, there is no need to
waste lime by burning the body. Areas where Trolls are found
are hazardous enough without calling attention to oneself in
this manner!

6.6 PÛKEL-CREATURES
Pûkel-creatures are animated stone or metal monsters magically
instilled with enchanted spirits. Most are creations of the Drúadan,
or "Wose," culture. Others are the work of the Daen Coentis, a
proto-Dunlending people of the White Mountains among whom
the Woses lived and worked. Realizing the value of these stone
guardians, Sauron has also produced a plethora of Pûkel-creatures,
the most famous of which are his Watchers.
NOTE: Pûkel-creatures are artificial creations that survive
only because of the will of their maker. However, they are not
true monsters, since they are not perversions of life.
COLBRAN: all-E-8: l0 ft tall
Colbran are unseen until activated. Their "spirits" inhabit stone
or metal, causing it to glow with a faint blue light that betrays their
presence to the very few who know of the existence of these beings.
When awakened, they take the form of attenuated manlike beings
who glow with such a fierce blue light that they are difficult to gaze
upon.
These creations are the strongest and most clever of the works
of the Drúedain and the Daen Coentis. Colbran are the closest
thing, perhaps, to demons that has ever been created (rather than
summoned) by mortal Man. Some can even cast balls of lightning
or lightning bolts. Darkness-producing spells have little or no
effect on the intense glare of a Colbran, although the equally
intense natural Utterdarkness of other enchanted beings may
weaken (dim) or vanquish (extinguish) them. There is a 25%
chance that any unenhanced weapon w i l l shatter when striking a
Colbran, causing one to ten +0 sling attacks to anyone within a 30
ft radius.
H U R N D A E N : all-E-8; l 2 f t tall
Hurndaen look like iron pillars unless disturbed. Then they
become iron manlike forms, attacking as Mendaen (see below) but
with even more deadly effect. Like Mensharag (see below), they
can reconstitute themselves, but this process takes at least 50 years
of undisturbed repose.

56

Monster Glossary: Giant Spiders and Insects & Undead Beings

Shelob, Guardian of the Ephel Duath. Immortal daughter of a
demonic mother, Shelob occupied the caverns of Cirith Ungol
for two full Ages, serving as a guard for Mordor. She owed no
loyalty to Sauron, but rather operated on her own initiative in a
way that served his needs, much as the desires of a cat to kill
vermin serve the needs of the man whose house she chooses to
occupy. Indeed, Sauron often would send otherwise useless
prisoners to Shelob as a man would give his cat the giblets of a
hen he had slaughtered for his own table, yet "his cat he calls
her, but she owns him not" (the Redbook of Westmarch,
commenting on Shelob's relationship to Sauron). Indeed,
Shelob had precious little use for Sauron beyond considering
him a source of occasional treats.
Shelob's bulbous body is some 20 ft long. Each of her armorplated legs is 18 ft long at full extension and ends in an iron-hard
claw. She constantly exudes a foul odor like rotting carrion,
forcing all who come near her to fight immobilizing nausea (a
RR vs. a 5th level attack). Her body is surprisingly flexible, and
her tough hide consists of many overlapping folds, enabling the
giant she-spider to fit through amazingly small passages. This
overlapping hide is as tough as plate armor, leaving her two
clusters of glowing white eyes her only weak spots. Her legs,
however, are somewhat more vulnerable than her body. Both
her eyes and her legs will regenerate, given sufficient time, even
if severely damaged.
Shelob is also mistress of many spells. Her one true vulnerability, other than her delicate eyes, is that she cannot bear full
sunlight or the equivalent.
HUMMERHORNS: nwmkt-FM,HJ,EQ-9; 4-6ft wingspan

KING SPIDERS: hnwmkt-FM,CDHJ,ELQR-6; 2ft(body diam.)
King Spiders are similar to but unlike the Giant Spiders of
Mirkwood. They do not build large webs but rather dig deep pits,
2-3 ft wide and 8-10 ft deep. A King Spider caps this pit with a lid
cleverly woven from a small amount of spider-silk, disguising the
covering with leaves and other vegetation so that it is extremely
hard (-30) to detect. Victims falling through the lid receive one to
three +25 short sword attacks from the strong, knife-like silk
tendrils. The pits are usually built on slopes. They support no more
than 40 pounds of weight.
The K i n g Spider, who has been waiting in a small side passage,
leaps upon the victim and biles it, injecting its special poison,
Kennesank. A RR f a i l u r e of 1-50 results in paralysis; a failure of
51+ results in death as the internal organs dissolve. If the victim
dies, the spider will eat it. If not, the thrifty spider saves the meal.
If it is a female who has recently mated, she may lay 6-12 eggs on
top of the helpless prey and leave, sealing the hole more sturdily
behind her. In two days, when the spiderlings hatch, they will
spend three weeks living on the food left behind by their mother.

Surely one of Endor's most vicious insects, the rare but often
lethal Hummerhorn is the stuff of legend. Each weighs 6-8 lbs and
has a razor sharp, pointed proboscis of chitin (transparent horn). It
gores a victim to death, then feasts on the corpse with three sets of
mandibles. They resemble gigantic black and grey wasps, and
their only failing is the noise they make whenever they approach.

6.8 UNDEAD BEINGS
B A R R O W WIGHTS: all-Q-6; 5-7feet
These strong yet miserable remnants commonly haunt their own
tombs in areas affected by and afflicted with evil power. They,
appear as dark, shadowy forms with glowing lights for eyes. They
attempt to capture living beings and sacrifice them to whatever evil
power they now worship (in Middle-earth, usually Morgoth), thus
gaining the life energy of the victims, which is what Wights "feed"
on. As they draw energy, they become more corporeal, showing
hands like claws and faces like skulls. If seen with magical means,
they appear as faded, pale versions of their former living selves.
They possess a 60-ft radius "Fear" spell that is an intrinsic facet of
their being; in addition, they can either paralyze or use sorcerous

57

Monster Glossary: Undead Beings
sleep on their victims to keep them immobile while the Wights
drain 5 constitution points per round. When all of the victim's
constitution is gone, he dies. Barrow Wights can use the actual
weapons and magical items buried with them; unlike lesser undead
beings, they will remember to do so, and quite effectively, too.
CORPSE CANDLES: hnwmskt-FM,CDHJP,EQRY-7; 5-7feet
Undead spirits. Corpse Candles can create the illusion of being
a whole, healthy creature by cloaking the hideous remains of its
once-living body. They lurk in water and exudes a beckoning light
that magically attracts victims. Those seeing the glow must resist
a 7th level spell, with failure resulting in the victim falling into a
deadly trance. (He then has 4 pts CO drained each round until
death.)
Corpse Candles and Corpse Lanterns are lesser and greater
manifestations of the same basic sort. They are remnants of those
who, already lying unquiet, were flooded in their graves.
CORPSE LANTERNS: hnwmskt-FM,CDHJP,EQRY-7; 5-7 feet
Corpse Lanterns, being both stronger and more i n t e l l i g e n t than
Corpse Candles, weave a stronger and more alluring web, appearing whole and wholesome above the waters of the marsh or swamp,
and seeming to the victim to be something that would attract his
attention. The visions vary according to the victim, and several
unfortunates gazing upon the same Corpse Lantern may see
different things: the lusty warrior may see a buxom wench with a
lantern, searching for something; the compassionate Healer a lost
child with a lamp; the suspicious thief a fat merchant with a purse
that could use lightening, engaged in burying more treasure in the
safe embrace of the marsh. Thus the Corpse Lantern entices its
victims to a death by drowning, enabling the undead remnant to
drain 5 Co points per round in the interim.
GHOSTS: all-Q-6; 4-8 feet
These can be the most powerful of undead, save the Nazgûl (see
below). They are totally energy, having no physical component at
all, and are activated solely by the presence of living beings of the
same type that they once were (most often Men). They appear as
they remember themselves being, with varying degrees of effectiveness: lesser Ghosts often neglect pertinent details, such as
appropriate clothing for the occasion. They also do not realize that,
since their appearence is nothing but illusion, their will can affect
it. A Ghost who wishes to be larger and more menacing is so, with
nothing but a thought. Greater Ghosts, whose instincts are under
more control, avoid this giveaway and behave in a very lifelike
manner, enabling them to drain the constitution (and hence l i t e energy) of a victim while engaging him in conversation or merely
being near him.
It is a strange fact that most Ghosts seem not to realize that they
are dead; often, if they can be convinced of their true nature, they
will dissipate and go forth to their appointed rest. (Note that Elves
do not have Ghosts, since their spirits always know where to go. It
is notable that Elves do not fear Ghosts, perhaps for this reason).
However, Ghosts are remarkably impervious to reason on this
score (How would you. Reader, react if someone insisted that you
were dead?), and would-be persuaders are well-warned that there
is no way that the Ghost can avoid draining their life-energy, any
more than they themselves can avoid having their hearts beat.
Anyone near enough to a Ghost to speak to it is near enough to be
drained.

Some Ghosts are bound to a place or object that was very
important to them in life or that figured strongly in their deaths: a
sentry killed while guarding a crucial post, for instance, whose
spirit remains "on duty" long after the fortress that he guarded has
fallen to ruins; the murder victim haunting the gold that she was
killed for; the child plague victim still holding fast to the wooden
doll that comforted its last hours.
GHOULS: all-Q-6; 4-8 feet
Ghouls are disgusting animated corpses that have the lengthened teeth and nails considered typical of a one- or two-month old
corpse. They are preserved by the conditions around them, either
tannin-loaded swampy water or drying winds, and they are animated by some evil power. Stupid and remembering little if any
of their past, Ghouls are dominated by thoughts of hunger for
energy and defense of their territory. The average Ghoul simply
rushes at its victims, tearing with teeth and nails. Their gruesome
appearance i n s t i l l s Fear (victims must make a successful RR or
flee), while their filthy and rotting bodies create wounds that often
(01-30) become infected.
NAZGÛL: all-9; 6-7feet
NOTE: The Nazgûl, or "Ringwraiths," are the true Lords of
the Undead. They are the single most powerful beings of this
nature ever to walk Middle-earth. All nine of these Wraithkings are described in detail in ICE's Lords of Middle-earth,
Volume II.
LESINAVI: as-WZ-8; 5-7 feet
The Lesinavi (Ap. "Corpses"; sing. "Lesina") haunt the dry
tracts of land that surround Raj in western Far Harad. These wilds
have served as unmarked graves to thousands over the centuries.
Gruesome beings, Lesinavi retain the bodies they held in life.
Desiccated and hardened by the desert sun, they lurk in the caves
of dry hills or among the dunes of the desert. In some cases, where
groups have died together, a number of these ghoul-like monsters
prowl the wastes together.
Lesinavi are unreasoning and mute, but their condition has
instilled in them an abiding hatred for all living men. Their dried
eyes see the life-energy of their victims as painful light against a
barely perceived landscape. Knowing neither pain nor fear, reason
nor strategy, they strike with their teeth and claws — felling a
victim and tearing him apart.
Lesinavi do not suffer from stun or bleeding criticals, but they
can be damaged by weapons. They are completely immune to all
spells that attack the mind or spirit, however they are otherwise
vulnerable to spells.
MEWLIPS:

hnwmskt-FM,CDHJP,EQRY-8; 6-11 ft

Mewlips are an evil, semi-legendary race of exceedingly rare,
cannibalistic spirits. These shadowy spirits exist to drink blood,
which they need almost as much as other undead need life-energy.
Denizens of graveyards, ruins, and other pleasant sites, they are
often found surprisingly near inhabited areas, especially if they
have not found much sustenance farther afield lately.
Mewlips are rare even for Undead. Fond of the most noisome
and darkest swamps and marshes, they have a silent tread and
strangling hands, although they typically use jagged weapons of
rusty steel or stone. They are deceptively human in appearance:
however, their backs are horribly hunched and their skin shines
with a clammy, greenish-brown palor. Even their ragged clothing
is moist and foul.

58
Mewlips feed on most anything and they covet shiny objects,
especially things of gold. It is said that such items remind them of
uncursed life, of the nature of beingsnot in the thrall of Darkness.
SAND DEVILS: as-WZ-8; 5-7 feet
Men who die in desert storms have been known to linger on in
Middle-earth as tortured spirits known as Sand Devils. They
maintain a semi-material form with the appearance of miniature,
sand-choked whirlwinds, and travel across the open wastes of the
desert searching aimlessly for lives which they can end. Their form
also makes for perfect camouflage in their environment, since
ordinary whirlwinds are not at all uncommon in the region.
A Sand Devil attacks by enveloping its prey inside its cloud-like
body, clogging the foes eyes, ears, mouth, and nose w i t h a mass of
swirling sand. The sand also tears at the victim's flesh (delivering
one point of damage in each of the first two rounds, two in the third
and forth, four in the fifth and sixth, and so forth).
Sand Devils are susceptible to magical attacks, but they are most
vulnerable to water. The contents of a waterskin. when thrown on
a Sand Devil's dry body, will have the effect of a +10 Fireball. Any
magical attacks from water-based spell l i s t s w i l l have triple effect.
For this reason, many experienced Haradan travellers journeying
across the Mirror of Fire or the Dune Sea carry their water bottles
open and ready, figuring that the loss of water is worth the
insurance.

SKELETONS: all-UVW,ELQRY-6; 5-7 feet
Skeletons are similar to Ghouls, except that they have been
picked clean of all flesh. Somehow their bleached bones hang together, animated by evil forces. While not as inherently disgusting as Ghouls, the sight of an animated Skeleton bearing weapons
is still terrifying. The common Skeleton attacks alter the manner
of a Ghoul, rushing headlong at its foe and using i t s teeth and claws.
Skeleton Lords often bear the weapons that were buried w i t h them
and can utilize simple magical items.
Having no organs or blood. Skeletons are not affected by
bleeding criticals, and all Puncture criticals become Crushes.
SPECTERS: all-UVW,ELQRY-6; 5-7 f e e t
Uncommon in Middle-earth, Specters are cold, white, incorporeal figures akin to Ghosts. Victims killed by Specters frequently
become Specters themselves. The Balrog of Moria, for instance,
had his minions throw captives into caverns and pits known to be
haunted by these creatures.
The Specters' need for energy is so great that even the lesser kind
drain 8 points of constitution per round. They cannot be affected
by nonmagical weapons because of their insubstantial nature. The
Specters of Moria can cast Shock Bolts, in addition to their energydraining abilities.
S W A M P STARS: hnwmskt-FM,CDHJP,EQRY-7;
6-18 inches across
Swamp Stars are Ghosts that have totally degenerated away
from any semblance of their original form. They manifest themselves as small, bright lights that lead (using a 5th level spell of
Luring) the unwary into bogs, quicksand, or deep pools in marshes
and swamps. While the victim drowns or is immobilized, the
Swamp Star drains 6 points of Co (life energy) per round.

Monster Glossary: Undead Beings
TA-FA-LISCH: all-AUVW,ELQRY-6; 3.5-4.5 feet
Dwarves rarely become Undead. Exceptions, such as the Ta-FaLisch of Rhudaur, are the result of powerful magical influences.
Remnants of the Petty-Dwarves, the Ta-Fa-Lisch are magically
linked to nuggets of a rare, cursed mineral called Crospar. When
these nuggets were destroyed, the Dwarvish spirits became free.
Small but terrifying, the Ta-Fa-Lisch appear as shadowy forms
with glowing eyes and teeth. They can see in the most impenetrable darkness and can only be struck by weapons when they
attack. Soundless, they sneak up upon their victims to slay them,
preferably by cutting the throat. They are so frightening that all
who face them must make a RR vs a 5th level Fear spell.
WARGS: all-6: 6-8ft (8-11 w/ tail)
Wargs are bred from cursed Wolves. Unusually large and fierce,
they are also more intelligent than their canine ancestors. They
serve as mounts for Orcs and as guards and scouts for Morgoth.
Being artificially long-lived, undead, the spirit that inhabits a
Warg's form dissipates when the body is slain. In turn, the body
disappears.
WEREWOLVES: all-6; 6-8 ft (8-11 w/ tail)
Morgoth originally produced Werewolves by magically altering his minion's forms so that they became huge, enchanted
Wolves. He created others by placing his minion's spirits in the
bodies of great Wargs.
These creatures can alter their form so that they can stand
upright and use their clawlike hands, but they cannot transform
themselves into Men. While Werewolves possess the intelligence
of the Secondborn — and though they can speak, use tools, and cast
spells — they remain Wolf-like in their nature.
Caran-Carach, Guardian of Dol Guldur. Caran-Carach (S.
"Red Fang") was a descendant of Draugluin. He helped guard
the fortress of Dol Guldur, the home of the Necromancer
(Sauron in the mid-Third Age). Fed the remains of the Evil
One's prisoners, this hideous beast learned to savor live flesh.
He was later let loose to h u n t prominent the Wood-elves and
Wood-men of southern Mirkwood.
Carcharoth, Mightiest Wolf of Arda. Carcharoth (S. "Red
Maw") was bred by Morgoth to slay Huan, the Noble Hound of
Valinor. Morgoth took one of the cubs of Draugluin and fed him
with his own hand upon living victims, until Carcharoth grew
so huge that he could not fit into the dens of the great Werewolves but instead crouched at his Master's feet. Yet Lúthien
was still able to ensorcel him. Later, however, when Beren and
Lúthien fled with the Silmaril, Carcharoth bit off the hand of
Beren that held the Great Jewel and swallowed them both.
Mighty was Carcharoth, but his innards were not proof against
that flame that emanated from the Silmaril. Crazed with pain, he
ran amok throughout Doriath, until he was finally slain by Huan
in the Hunting of the Wolf. Yet the Great Hound also was killed,
for Carcharoth gave him mortal wounds. After the Great Wolf
was killed, the Silmaril was ripped from his belly by those who
had hunted him.
Draugluin, Greatest of the Werewolves. This servant of Sauron
was the sire of most of the Werewolves of Angband. He
guarded Sauron's fortress in the First Age and was slain by
Huan the Hound (see above) when that noble beast accompanied Lúthien to the fortress to rescue Beren from the Island of
the Werewolves. Draugluin tied when he realized that his end
was near and died at his Black Master's feet, warning him that
the Great Hound was there.

